iii
THE FELLOWSHIP
OF THE RING
being the first part of
THE LORD OF THE RINGS
by
J.R.R. TOLKIEN

Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
.
CONTENTS
Note on the Text                                                      ix
Note on the 50th Anniversary Edition                   xviii
Foreword to the Second Edition                        xxiii
Prologue Concerning Hobbits, and other
matters 1
book one
I A Long-expected Party 27
II The Shadow of the Past 55
III Three is Company 85
IV A Short Cut to Mushrooms 112
V A Conspiracy Unmasked 128
VI The Old Forest 143
VII In the House of Tom Bombadil 161
VIII Fog on the Barrow-downs 176
IX At the Sign of The Prancing Pony 195
X Strider 213
XI A Knife in the Dark 230
XII Flight to the Ford 257
book two
I Many Meetings 285
II The Council of Elrond 311
III The Ring Goes South 354
viii contents
IV A Journey in the Dark 384
V The Bridge of Khazad-du ˆm 418
VI Lothlo ´rien 433
VII The Mirror of Galadriel 459
VIII Farewell to Lo ´rien 478
IX The Great River 495
X The Breaking of the Fellowship 515
Maps                                                            533
Works By J.R.R. Tolkien                            540
About The Publisher                                         542
Copyright                                                    541
.
NOTE ON THE TEXT
J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings is often erroneously
called a trilogy, when it is in fact a single novel, consisting
of six books plus appendices, sometimes published in three
volumes.
The ﬁrst volume, The Fellowship of the Ring , was published
in Great Britain by the London ﬁrm George Allen & Unwin
on29July1954 ; an American edition followed on 21October
of the same year, published by Houghton Mifﬂin Company
of Boston. In the production of this ﬁrst volume, Tolkienexperienced what became for him a continual problem:printer’s errors and compositor’s mistakes, including well-intentioned ‘corrections’ of his sometimes idiosyncraticusage. These ‘corrections’ include the altering of dwarves to
dwarfs ,elvish toelﬁsh ,further tofarther ,nasturtians tonastur-
tiums ,try and say totry to say and (‘worst of all’ to Tolkien)
elven toelﬁn. In a work such as The Lord of the Rings ,
containing invented languages and delicately constructed
nomenclatures, errors and inconsistencies impede both theunderstanding and the appreciation of serious readers – andTolkien had many such readers from very early on. Evenbefore the publication of the third volume, which containedmuch hitherto unrevealed information on the invented lan-guages and writing systems, Tolkien received many lettersfrom readers written in these systems, in addition to numer-ous enquiries on the ﬁner points of their usage.
The second volume, The Two Towers , was published in
England on 11November 1954 and in the United States on
21April1955 . Meanwhile Tolkien worked to keep a promise
he had made in the foreword to volume one: that ‘an indexof names and strange words’ would appear in the third vol-ume. As originally planned, this index would contain muchetymological information on the languages, particularly onthe elven tongues, with a large vocabulary. It proved the chief
xii note on the text
cause of the delay in publishing volume three, which in the
end contained no index at all, only an apology from the
publisher for its absence. For Tolkien had abandoned workon it after indexing volumes one and two, believing its sizeand therefore its cost to be ruinous.
Volume three, The Return of the King , ﬁnally appeared in
England on 20October 1955 and in the United States on
5January1956 . With the appearance of the third volume,
The Lord of the Rings was published in its entirety, and its
ﬁrst edition text remained virtually unchanged for a decade.
Tolkien had made a few small corrections, but further errorsentered The Fellowship of the Ring in its December 1954
second impression when the printer, having distributed thetype after the ﬁrst printing, reset the book without informing
the author or publisher. These include misrepresentations ofthe original printed text – that is, words and phrases thatread acceptably in context, but which depart from Tolkien’swording as originally written and published.
In1965 , stemming from what then appeared to be copy-
right problems in the United States, an American paperbackﬁrm published an unauthorized and non-royalty-paying edi-tion of The Lord of the Rings . For this new edition by Ace
Books the text of the narrative was reset, thus introducingnew typographical errors; the appendices, however, werereproduced photographically from the hardcover edition, andremain consistent with it.
Tolkien set to work on his ﬁrst revision of the text so that
a newly revised and authorized edition could successfullycompete on the American market. This ﬁrst revision of thetext was published in America in paperback by BallantineBooks, under licence from Houghton Mifﬂin, in October1965 . In addition to revisions within the text itself, Tolkien
replaced his original foreword with a new one. He was pleasedto remove the original foreword; in his check copy, hewrote of it: ‘confusing (as it does) real personal matters withthe ‘‘machinery’’ of the Tale, is a serious mistake’. Tolkienalso added an extension to the prologue and an index – not
note on the text xiii
the detailed index of names promised in the ﬁrst edition,
but, rather, a bald index with only names and page refer-
ences. Additionally, at this time the appendices were greatlyrevised.
Tolkien received his copies of the Ballantine edition in late
January1966 , and in early February he recorded in his diary
that he had ‘worked for some hours on the Appendices in
Ballantine version & found more errors than I at ﬁrstexpected’. Soon after this he sent a small number of furtherrevisions to Ballantine for the appendices, including the nowwell-known addition of ‘Estella Bolger’ as wife of Meriadocin the family trees in Appendix C. Most of these revisions,which entered variously in the third and fourth impressions(June and August 1966 ) of volume three, and which were
not always inserted correctly (thereby causing further con-
fusion in the text), somehow never made it into the mainsequence of revision in the three-volume British hardcoveredition, and for long remained anomalies. Tolkien oncewrote, concerning the revising of The Lord of the Rings , that
perhaps he had failed to keep his notes in order; this errantbranch of revision seems likely to be an example of thatdisorder – either in his notes or in the ability of his publishersto follow them with utmost accuracy.
The revised text ﬁrst appeared in Great Britain in a three-
volume hardcover ‘Second Edition’ from Allen & Unwin on27October1966 . But again there were problems. Although
the revisions Tolkien sent to America of the text itself wereavailable to be utilized in the new British edition, his extensiverevisions to the appendices were lost after being entered intothe Ballantine edition. Allen & Unwin were forced to reset theappendices using the copy as published in the ﬁrst Ballantineedition. This did not include Tolkien’s second, small set ofrevisions sent to Ballantine; but, more signiﬁcantly, it didinclude a great number of errors and omissions, many ofwhich were not discovered until long afterwards. Thus, inthe appendices, a close scrutiny of the ﬁrst edition text andof the much later corrected impressions of the second edition
xiv note on the text
is necessary to discern whether any particular change in this
edition is authorial or erroneous.
In America, the revised text appeared in hardcover in the
three-volume edition published by Houghton Mifﬂin on
27February 1967 . This text was evidently photo-offset from
the1966 Allen & Unwin three-volume hardcover, and is thus
consistent with it. Aside from the ﬁrst printing of this second
Houghton Mifﬂin edition, which has a 1967 date on the title
page, none of the many reprintings is dated. After the initialprintings of this edition, which bore a 1966 copyright notice,
the date of copyright was changed in 1965 to match the
statement in the Ballantine edition. This change has causeda great deal of confusion for librarians and other researcherswho have tried to sort out the sequence of publication of
these editions.
Meanwhile, Tolkien spent much of the summer of 1966
further revising the text. In June he learned that any morerevisions were too late for inclusion in the 1966 Allen &
Unwin second edition, and he recorded in his diary: ‘But Iam attempting to complete my work [on the revisions] – Icannot leave it while it is all in my mind. So much time hasbeen wasted in all my work by this constant breaking ofthreads.’ This was the last major set of revisions Tolkienhimself made to the text during his lifetime. They were addedto the second impression ( 1967 ) of the three-volume hard-
cover Allen & Unwin second edition. The revisions them-selves mostly include corrections of nomenclature andattempts at consistency of usage throughout the three vol-umes. Some small alterations were made by Tolkien in the1969 one-volume India paper edition.
J.R.R. Tolkien died in 1973 . His third son and literary
executor, Christopher Tolkien, sent a large number of furthercorrections of misprints, mainly in the appendices and index,to Allen & Unwin for use in their editions in 1974 . Most of
these corrections were typographical, and in line with hisfather’s expressed intent in his own check copies.
Since1974 , Christopher Tolkien has sent additional cor-
note on the text xv
rections, as errors have been discovered, to the British pub-
lishers of The Lord of the Rings (Allen & Unwin, later Unwin
Hyman, and now HarperCollins), who have tried to be con-
scientious in the impossible task of maintaining a textualintegrity in whichever editions of The Lord of the Rings they
have published. However, every time the text has been resetfor publication in a new format (e.g. the various paperback
editions published in England in the 1970 s and1980 s), huge
numbers of new misprints have crept in, though at timessome of these errors have been observed and corrected inlater printings. Still, throughout these years the three-volumeBritish hardcover edition has retained the highest textualintegrity.
In the United States, the text of the Ballantine paperback
has remained unchanged for more than three decades after
Tolkien added his few revisions in 1966 . The text in all of
the Houghton Mifﬂin editions remained unchanged from1967 until1987 , when Houghton Mifﬂin photo-offset the
then current three-volume British hardcover edition in orderto update the text used in their editions. In those newreprintings a number of further corrections (overseen byChristopher Tolkien) were added, and the errant Ballantinebranch of revision (including the ‘Estella Bolger’ addition)was integrated into the main branch of textual descent. Thismethod of correction involved a cut-and-paste process withprinted versions of the text. Beginning with the 1987 Hough-
ton Mifﬂin edition, an earlier version of this ‘Note on theText’ (dated October 1986 ) was added to The Lord of the
Rings . This ‘Note’ has been reworked three times since then
– the version dated April 1993 ﬁrst appeared in 1994 , and
the version dated April 2002 came out later that year. The
present ‘Note’ replaces and supersedes all previous versions.
For the1994 British edition published by HarperCollins,
the text of The Lord of the Rings was entered into word-
processing ﬁles. This next stage of textual evolution cameabout to allow for a greater uniformity of the text in all futureeditions, but with it, inevitably, came new wrinkles. Some
xvi note on the text
new misreadings entered into the text, while at the same time
others were ﬁxed. In the worst instance, one line of the ring
inscription in the chapter ‘The Shadow of the Past’ of The
Fellowship of the Ring was simply dropped. Unforeseeable
glitches arose in other editions when the base computerizedtext was transferred into page-making or typesetting pro-grams – e.g., in one edition of The Fellowship of the Ring , the
closing two sentences of ‘The Council of Elrond’ simply and
inexplicably disappeared. Such glitches have been very muchthe exception, not the rule, and the text has otherwise main-tained a consistency and integrity throughout its com-puterized evolution.
The1994 edition also contained a number of new correc-
tions (again supervised by Christopher Tolkien), as well as a
reconﬁgured index of names and page references. The 1994
text was ﬁrst used in American editions published by Hough-ton Mifﬂin in 1999 . A small number of further corrections
were added into the 2002 three-volume edition illustrated by
Alan Lee, published by HarperCollins in Great Britain andHoughton Mifﬂin in the United States.
The textual history of The Lord of the Rings , merely in its
published form, is a vast and complex web. In this briefnote I have given only a glimpse of the overall sequence andstructure. Further details on the revisions and correctionsmade over the years to the published text of The Lord of the
Rings , and a fuller account of its publishing history, may be
found in J.R.R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography , by Wayne
G. Hammond, with the assistance of Douglas A. Anderson(1993 ).
For those interested in observing the gradual evolving of
The Lord of the Rings from its earliest drafts to its published
form, I highly recommend Christopher Tolkien’s account,which appears within ﬁve volumes of his twelve-volume seriesThe History of Middle-earth . Volumes six through nine con-
tain the major part of his study pertaining to The Lord of the
Rings :The Return of the Shadow (1988 );The Treason of
note on the text xvii
Isengard (1989 );The War of the Ring (1990 ); and Sauron
Defeated (1992 ). Also, the ﬁnal book of the series, The Peoples
of Middle-earth (1996 ), covers the evolution of the prologue
and appendices to The Lord of the Rings . These volumes
contain an engrossing over-the-shoulder account of the
growth and writing of Tolkien’s masterpiece.
The process of studying Tolkien’s manuscripts of The Lord
of the Rings involved the deciphering of versions where
Tolkien wrote ﬁrst in pencil and then in ink atop the pencilled
draft. Christopher Tolkien has decribed his father’s methodof composition in The Return of the Shadow : ‘In the handwrit-
ing that he used for rapid drafts and sketches, not intendedto endure long before he turned to them again and gave thema more workable form, letters are so loosely formed that a
word which cannot be deduced or guessed at from the con-text or from later versions can prove perfectly opaque afterlong examination; and if, as he often did, he used a soft pencilmuch has now become blurred and faint.’ The true difﬁcultyof reading such double-drafts can be observed in the frontis-piece to The War of the Ring , which reproduces in colour
Tolkien’s illustration of ‘Shelob’s Lair’ from a page ofTolkien’s manuscript. Looking very closely at the hasty inkdraft alongside the illustration, one can see underneath it theearlier, hastier, pencilled draft. Also in The War of the Ring ,
Christopher Tolkien reproduces a page from the ﬁrst manu-script of the chapter ‘The Taming of Sme ´agol’, and the
printed text corresponding to this text is on the facing page(see pp. 90–91). One is astonished at anyone’s ability to
decipher such texts.
That difﬁculty aside, just what do these books signify to
ordinary readers and to Tolkien scholars? And what is ‘thehistory of the writing’ of a book? Simply, these volumes showin great detail the development of the story of The Lord of
the Rings from its very earliest drafts and hasty projections
through its completion. We see in the earliest materials whatis very much a children’s book, a sequel to The Hobbit , and
as the story grows through various ‘phases’, there is an
xviii note on the text
increase in seriousness and depth. We see alternate branches
of development, the gradual blending and merging of certain
characters, and the slow emergence of the nature of the ringsand of the motivations of other characters. Some of thesevarious ideas are abandoned altogether, while others arereworked into some variant form that may or may not surviveinto the ﬁnal version.
One could make a whole catalogue of interesting tidbits
from Christopher Tolkien’s study – such as the fact that
Strider was called Trotter until a very late stage in the writingof the book; that Trotter was at one time a hobbit, so namedbecause he wore wooden shoes; that Tolkien at one pointconsidered a romance between Aragorn and E ´owyn; that
Tolkien wrote an epilogue to the book, tying up loose ends,
but it was dropped before publication (and now appears inSauron Defeated ); and so on. But these developments are best
appreciated when read within the context of ChristopherTolkien’s commentary rather than discussed separately.
The most signiﬁcant achievement of these volumes is that
they show us how Tolkien wrote and thought. Nowhere elsedo we see the authorial process itself at work in such detail.Tolkien’s hastiest comments about where the story mightproceed, or why it can or can’t go such and such a way –these queries to himself were written out: Tolkien is literallythinking on paper. This gives an added dimension of under-standing to Tolkien’s comment to Stanley Unwin in a 1963
letter that, when suffering from trouble with his shoulder andright arm, ‘I found not being able to use a pen or pencil asdefeating as the loss of her beak would be to a hen.’ And we,as readers of these volumes, can share with Tolkien himselfthe wonder and bewilderment of new characters appearingas if from nowhere, or of some other sudden change or devel-opment, at the very moment of their emergence into thestory.
I know of no other instance in literature where we have
such a ‘history of the writing’ of a book, told mostly by theauthor himself, with all the hesitations and false paths laid
note on the text xix
out before us, sorted out, commented upon, and served up
to a reader like a feast. We are shown innumerable instances
in the minutest detail of the thought-process itself at work.We see the author fully absorbed in creation for its own sake.And this is all the more exceptional because this is a historynot only of the unfolding of a story and its text, but of theevolution of a world. There is an additional wealth of material
beyond simple narrative text. There are maps and illustra-tions. There are languages and writing systems, and the his-tories of the peoples who spoke and wrote in these systems.All of these additional materials add multiple dimensions ofcomplexity to our appreciation of the invented world itself.
Fifty years into the published life of The Lord of the Rings ,
it seems extraordinary to me that we have not only such a
masterful work of literature but also as a companion to it anunparalleled account of its writing. Our gratitude as readersgoes to both of the Tolkiens, father and son.
Douglas A. Anderson
May2004
NOTE ON THE 50THANNIVERSARY
EDITION
In this edition of The Lord of the Rings , prepared for the
ﬁftieth anniversary of its publication, between three and four
hundred emendations have been made following an exhaus-
tive review of past editions and printings. The present text
is based on the setting of the HarperCollins three-volumehardcover edition of 2002 , which in turn was a revision of the
HarperCollins reset edition of 1994 . As Douglas A. Anderson
comments in the preceding ‘Note on the Text’, each of those
editions was itself corrected, and each also introduced newerrors. At the same time, other errors survived undetected,among them some ﬁve dozen which entered as long ago as1954 , in the resetting of The Fellowship of the Ring published
as its ‘second impression’.
That the printer had quietly reset The Fellowship of the
Ring, and that copies had been issued without proof having
been read by the author, never became known to Tolkien;
while his publisher, Rayner Unwin, learned of it only thirty-eight years after the fact. Tolkien found a few of the unautho-rized changes introduced in the second printing when(probably while preparing the second edition in 1965 )h e
read a copy of the twelfth impression ( 1962 ), but thought
the errors newly made. These, among others, were correctedin the course of the reprinting. Then in 1992 Eric Thompson,
a reader with a keen eye for typographic detail, noticed smalldifferences between the ﬁrst and second impressions of The
Fellowship of the Ring and called them to the attention of the
present editors. About one-sixth of the errors that entered inthe second printing quickly came to light. Many more were
revealed only recently, when Steven M. Frisby used ingenious
optical aids to make a comparison of copies of The Lord of
the Rings in greater detail than was previously accomplished.
note on the 50thanniversary edition xxi
We have gladly made full use of Mr Frisby’s results, which
he has generously shared and discussed.
In the course of its ﬁfty-year history The Lord of the Rings
has had many such readers who have recorded changes made
between its various appearances in print, both to documentwhat has gone before and to aid in the achievement of anauthoritative text. Errors or possible errors were reported to
the author himself or to his publishers, and information onthe textual history of the work circulated among Tolkienenthusiasts at least as early as 1966 , when Banks Mebane
published his ‘Prolegomena to a Variorum Tolkien’ in thefanzine Entmoot . Most notably in later years, Douglas A.
Anderson has been in the forefront of efforts to achieve anaccurate text of The Lord of the Rings (and of The Hobbit );
Christina Scull has published ‘A Preliminary Study of Vari-
ations in Editions of The Lord of the Rings ’i nBeyond Bree
(April and August 1985 ); Wayne G. Hammond has compiled
extensive lists of textual changes in J.R.R. Tolkien: A Descrip-
tive Bibliography (1993 ); and David Bratman has published
an important article, ‘A Corrigenda to The Lord of the Rings ’,
in the March 1994 number of The Tolkien Collector . The
observations of Dainis Bisenieks, Yuval Welis, Charles Noad,and other readers, sent to us directly or posted in publicforums, have also been of service.
Efforts such as these follow the example of the author of
The Lord of the Rings during his lifetime. His concern for the
textual accuracy and coherence of his work is evident fromthe many emendations he made in later printings, and fromnotes he made for other emendations which for one reasonor another have not previously (or have only partly) been putinto effect. Even late in life, when such labours wearied him,his feelings were clear. On 30October1967 he wrote to Joy
Hill at George Allen & Unwin, concerning a reader’s queryhe had received about points in the Appendices to The Lord
of the Rings : ‘Personally I have ceased to bother about these
minor ‘‘discrepancies’’, since if the genealogies and calendarsetc. lack verisimilitude it is in their general excessive accuracy:
xxii note on the 50thanniversary edition
as compared with real annals or genealogies! Anyway the
slips were few, have now mostly been removed, and the dis-
covery of what remain seems an amusing pastime! But errors
in the text are another matter ’ (italics ours). In fact Tolkien
had not ‘ceased to bother’, and ‘slips’ were dealt with asopportunities arose. These, and the indulgence of his pub-lisher, allowed Tolkien a luxury few authors enjoy: multiple
chances not only to correct his text but to improve it, and tofurther develop the languages, geography, and peoples ofMiddle-earth.
The ﬁftieth anniversary of The Lord of the Rings seemed an
ideal opportunity to consider the latest ( 2002 ) text in light of
information we had gathered in the course of decades of workin Tolkien studies, with Steve Frisby’s research at hand, and
with an electronic copy of The Lord of the Rings (supplied by
HarperCollins) searchable by keyword or phrase. The latterespecially allowed us to develop lists of words that variedfrom one instance to another, and investigate variations inusage, as they stood in the copy-text and relative to earliereditions and printings. Of course Tolkien wrote The Lord of
the Rings over so long a period of time, some eighteen years,
that inconsistencies in its text were almost inevitable. Chris-topher Tolkien even observed to us that some apparentinconsistencies of form in his father’s work may even havebeen deliberate: for instance, although Tolkien carefully dis-tinguished house ‘dwelling’ from House ‘noble family or dyn-
asty’, in two instances he used house in the latter sense but
in lower case, perhaps because a capital letter would havedetracted from the importance of the adjective with whichthe word was paired (‘royal house’, ‘golden house’). Therecan be no doubt, however, that Tolkien attempted to correctinconsistency, no less than outright error, whenever it cameto his attention, and it was our opinion, with the advice andagreement of Christopher Tolkien, that an attempt should bemade to do so in the anniversary edition, in so far as we couldcarefully and conservatively distinguish what to emend.
Many of the emendations in the present text are to marks
note on the 50thanniversary edition xxiii
of punctuation, either to correct recent typographical errors
or to repair surviving alterations introduced in the second
printing of The Fellowship of the Ring . In the latter respect
and in every case, Tolkien’s original punctuation is alwaysmore felicitous – subtle points, when one is comparing com-mas and semi-colons, but no less a part of the author’sintended expression. Distinctive words such as chill rather
than cold, and glistered rather than glistened , changed by type-
setters long ago without authorization, likewise have been
restored. A controlled amount of regularization also seemedcalled for, such as naught rather than nought , a change insti-
tuted by Tolkien but not carried through in all instances;Dark Power rather than dark power when the reference is
obviously to Sauron (or Morgoth); Barrow-downs by Tolkien’s
preference rather than Barrowdowns ; likewise Bree-hill rather
than Bree Hill ; accented and more common Dru´adan rather
than Druadan ; capitalized names of seasons when used as
personiﬁcation or metaphor, according to Tolkien’s predomi-
nant practice and the internal logic of the text; and Elvish
rather than elvish when used as a separate adjective, following
a preference Tolkien marked in his copy of the second editionofThe Lord of the Rings . In addition, we have added a second
accent to Nu´meno´rean(s) , as Tolkien often wrote the name in
manuscript and as it appears in The Silmarillion and other
posthumous publications.
The result, nonetheless, still includes many variations in
capitalization, punctuation, and other points of style. Not allof these are erroneous: they include words such as Sun,Moon ,
Hobbit , and Man (orsun,moon ,hobbit ,man), which may
change form according to meaning or application, in relationto adjacent adjectives, or whether Tolkien intended personi-ﬁcation, poetry, or emphasis. His intent cannot be divinedwith conﬁdence in every case. But it is possible to discernTolkien’s preferences in many instances, from statements hewrote in his check copies of The Lord of the Rings or from a
close analysis of its text in manuscript, typescript, proof, andprint. Whenever there has been any doubt whatsoever as to
xxiv note on the 50thanniversary edition
the author’s intentions, the text has been allowed to stand.
Most of the demonstrable errors noted by Christopher
Tolkien in The History of Middle-earth also have been cor-
rected, such as the distance from the Brandywine Bridge to
the Ferry ( tenmiles rather than twenty ) and the number of
Merry’s ponies ( ﬁverather than six), shadows of earlier
drafts. But those inconsistencies of content, such as Gimli’s
famous (and erroneous) statement in Book III, Chapter 7,
‘Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria’,which would require rewriting to emend rather than simplecorrection, remain unchanged.
So many new emendations to The Lord of the Rings , and
such an extensive review of its text, deserve to be fully docu-mented. Although most readers will be content with the text
alone, many will want to know more about the problemsencountered in preparing this new edition, and their solutions(where solutions have been possible), especially where thetext has been emended, but also where it has not. To thisend, and to illuminate the work in other respects, we arepreparing a volume of annotations to The Lord of the Rings
for publication in 2005 . This will allow us to discuss, at a
length impossible in a prefatory note, the various textualcruces of The Lord of the Rings , to identify changes that have
been made to the present text, and to remark on signiﬁcantalterations to the published work throughout its history. Wewill also explain archaic or unusual words and names in The
Lord of the Rings , explore literary and historical inﬂuences,
note connections with Tolkien’s other writings, and commenton differences between its drafts and published form, onquestions of language, and on much else that we hope willinterest readers and enhance their enjoyment of Tolkien’smasterpiece.
Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull
May2004
FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION
This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the
Great War of the Ring and included many glimpses of theyet more ancient history that preceded it. It was begun soon
after The Hobbit was written and before its publication in
1937 ; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished ﬁrst
to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of
the Elder Days, which had then been taking shape for someyears. I desired to do this for my own satisfaction, and I had
little hope that other people would be interested in this work,especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration andwas begun in order to provide the necessary background of‘history’ for Elvish tongues.
When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected
little hope tono hope , I went back to the sequel, encouraged
by requests from readers for more information concerning
hobbits and their adventures. But the story was drawn irre-sistibly towards the older world, and became an account, asit were, of its end and passing away before its beginning andmiddle had been told. The process had begun in the writingofThe Hobbit , in which there were already some references
to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, andthe orcs, as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden ofthings higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin,Moria, Gandalf, the Necromancer, the Ring. The discoveryof the signiﬁcance of these glimpses and of their relation tothe ancient histories revealed the Third Age and its culmi-nation in the War of the Ring.
Those who had asked for more information about hobbits
eventually got it, but they had to wait a long time; for thecomposition of The Lord of the Rings went on at intervals
during the years 1936 to1949 , a period in which I had many
duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as alearner and teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was,
xxvi foreword to the second edition
of course, also increased by the outbreak of war in 1939 ,b y
the end of which year the tale had not yet reached the end of
Book One. In spite of the darkness of the next ﬁve years Ifound that the story could not now be wholly abandoned,and I plodded on, mostly by night, till I stood by Balin’s tombin Moria. There I halted for a long while. It was almost ayear later when I went on and so came to Lothlo ´rien and the
Great River late in 1941 . In the next year I wrote the ﬁrst
drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and the
beginnings of chapters I and III of Book Five; and there asthe beacons ﬂared in Ano ´rien and The ´oden came to Harrow-
dale I stopped. Foresight had failed and there was no timefor thought.
It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplex-
ities of a war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to
report, I forced myself to tackle the journey of Frodo toMordor. These chapters, eventually to become Book Four,were written and sent out as a serial to my son, Christopher,then in South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it tookanother ﬁve years before the tale was brought to its presentend; in that time I changed my house, my chair, and mycollege, and the days though less dark were no less laborious.Then when the ‘end’ had at last been reached the whole storyhad to be revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards.And it had to be typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost ofprofessional typing by the ten-ﬁngered was beyond mymeans.
The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since
it ﬁnally appeared in print; and I should like to say somethinghere with reference to the many opinions or guesses that Ihave received or have read concerning the motives and mean-ing of the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a tale-tellerto try his hand at a really long story that would hold theattention of readers, amuse them, delight them, and at timesmaybe excite them or deeply move them. As a guide I hadonly my own feelings for what is appealing or moving, andfor many the guide was inevitably often at fault. Some who
foreword to the second edition xxvii
have read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have
found it boring, absurd, or contemptible; and I have no cause
to complain, since I have similar opinions of their works, orof the kinds of writing that they evidently prefer. But evenfrom the points of view of many who have enjoyed my storythere is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possiblein a long tale to please everybody at all points, nor to displease
everybody at the same points; for I ﬁnd from the letters thatI have received that the passages or chapters that are to somea blemish are all by others specially approved. The mostcritical reader of all, myself, now ﬁnds many defects, minorand major, but being fortunately under no obligation eitherto review the book or to write it again, he will pass over thesein silence, except one that has been noted by others: the book
is too short.
As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the inten-
tion of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical.As the story grew it put down roots (into the past) and threwout unexpected branches: but its main theme was settledfrom the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as thelink between it and The Hobbit . The crucial chapter, ‘The
Shadow of the Past’, is one of the oldest parts of the tale. Itwas written long before the foreshadow of 1939 had yet
become a threat of inevitable disaster, and from that pointthe story would have developed along essentially the samelines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are thingslong before in mind, or in some cases already written, andlittle or nothing in it was modiﬁed by the war that began in1939 or its sequels.
The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its
process or its conclusion. If it had inspired or directed thedevelopment of the legend, then certainly the Ring wouldhave been seized and used against Sauron; he would not havebeen annihilated but enslaved, and Barad-du ˆr would not have
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get pos-session of the Ring, would in the confusion and treacheriesof the time have found in Mordor the missing links in his
xxviii foreword to the second edition
own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would
have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge
the self-styled Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conﬂict bothsides would have held hobbits in hatred and contempt: theywould not long have survived even as slaves.
Other arrangements could be devised according to the
tastes or views of those who like allegory or topical reference.
But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, andalways have done so since I grew old and wary enough todetect its presence. I much prefer history, true or feigned,with its varied applicability to the thought and experience ofreaders. I think that many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘alle-gory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, andthe other in the purposed domination of the author.
An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by
his experience, but the ways in which a story-germ uses the
soil of experience are extremely complex, and attempts todeﬁne the process are at best guesses from evidence that isinadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though naturallyattractive, when the lives of an author and critic have over-lapped, to suppose that the movements of thought or theevents of times common to both were necessarily the mostpowerful inﬂuences. One has indeed personally to comeunder the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but asthe years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caughtin youth by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to
be involved in 1939 and the following years. By 1918 all but
one of my close friends were dead. Or to take a less grievousmatter: it has been supposed by some that ‘The Scouring ofthe Shire’ reﬂects the situation in England at the time whenI was ﬁnishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part ofthe plot, foreseen from the outset, though in the event modi-ﬁed by the character of Saruman as developed in the storywithout, need I say, any allegorical signiﬁcance or contem-porary political reference whatsoever. It has indeed somebasis in experience, though slender (for the economic situ-ation was entirely different), and much further back. The
foreword to the second edition xxix
country in which I lived in childhood was being shabbily
destroyed before I was ten, in days when motor-cars were
rare objects (I had never seen one) and men were still buildingsuburban railways. Recently I saw in a paper a picture of thelast decrepitude of the once thriving corn-mill beside its poolthat long ago seemed to me so important. I never liked thelooks of the Young miller, but his father, the Old miller, had
a black beard, and he was not named Sandyman.
The Lord of the Rings is now issued in a new edition, and
the opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number oferrors and inconsistencies that still remained in the text havebeen corrected, and an attempt has been made to provideinformation on a few points which attentive readers haveraised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries,
and if some seem to have been passed over that may bebecause I have failed to keep my notes in order; but manyenquiries could only be answered by additional appendices,or indeed by the production of an accessory volume contain-ing much of the material that I did not include in the originaledition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. Inthe meantime this edition offers this Foreword, an additionto the Prologue, some notes, and an index of the names ofpersons and places. This index is in intention complete initems but not in references, since for the present purpose ithas been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index,making full use of the material prepared for me by Mrs. N.Smith, belongs rather to the accessory volume.
.
PROLOGUE
1
Concerning Hobbits
This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its
pages a reader may discover much of their character and alittle of their history. Further information will also be foundin the selection from the Red Book of Westmarch that has
already been published, under the title of The Hobbit . That
story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book,composed by Bilbo himself, the ﬁrst Hobbit to becomefamous in the world at large, and called by him There and
Back Again , since they told of his journey into the East and
his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbitsin the great events of that Age that are here related.
Many, however, may wish to know more about this re-
markable people from the outset, while some may not possess
the earlier book. For such readers a few notes on the moreimportant points are here collected from Hobbit-lore, andthe ﬁrst adventure is brieﬂy recalled.
Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more
numerous formerly than they are today; for they love peaceand quiet and good tilled earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. They do notand did not understand or like machines more complicatedthan a forge-bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, thoughthey were skilful with tools. Even in ancient days theywere, as a rule, shy of ‘the Big Folk’, as they call us, and
now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to
ﬁnd. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and thoughthey are inclined to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, theyare nonetheless nimble and deft in their movements. They
2 prologue
possessed from the ﬁrst the art of disappearing swiftly and
silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to meet come
blundering by; and this art they have developed until to Menit may seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studiedmagic of any kind, and their elusiveness is due solely toa professional skill that heredity and practice, and a closefriendship with the earth, have rendered inimitable by bigger
and clumsier races.
For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less stout
and stocky, that is, even when they are not actually muchshorter. Their height is variable, ranging between two andfour feet of our measure. They seldom now reach three feet;but they have dwindled, they say, and in ancient days theywere taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took
(Bullroarer), son of Isumbras the Third, was four foot ﬁveand able to ride a horse. He was surpassed in all Hobbitrecords only by two famous characters of old; but that curiousmatter is dealt with in this book.
As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are
concerned, in the days of their peace and prosperity theywere a merry folk. They dressed in bright colours, beingnotably fond of yellow and green; but they seldom woreshoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were cladin a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, whichwas commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practisedamong them was shoe-making; but they had long and skilfulﬁngers and could make many other useful and comely things.Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beau-tiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt tolaughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, andeat, and drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jestsat all times, and of six meals a day (when they could getthem). They were hospitable and delighted in parties, and inpresents, which they gave away freely and eagerly accepted.
It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits
are relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even thanDwarves. Of old they spoke the languages of Men, after their
prologue 3
own fashion, and liked and disliked much the same things as
Men did. But what exactly our relationship is can no longer
be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in theElder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elvesstill preserve any records of that vanished time, and theirtraditions are concerned almost entirely with their own his-tory, in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits are not men-
tioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, livedquietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folkbecame even aware of them. And the world being after allfull of strange creatures beyond count, these little peopleseemed of very little importance. But in the days of Bilbo,and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish oftheir own, both important and renowned, and troubled the
counsels of the Wise and the Great.
Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long
past, and the shape of all lands has been changed; but theregions in which Hobbits then lived were doubtless the sameas those in which they still linger: the North-West of the OldWorld, east of the Sea. Of their original home the Hobbitsin Bilbo’s time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning(other than genealogical lore) was far from general amongthem, but there remained still a few in the older families whostudied their own books, and even gathered reports of oldtimes and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Their
own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back thantheir Wandering Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from theselegends, and from the evidence of their peculiar words andcustoms, that like many other folk Hobbits had in the distantpast moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse atime when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, betweenthe eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains.Why they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing ofthe mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their ownaccounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of
4 prologue
a shadow that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened
and its new name was Mirkwood.
Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had
already become divided into three somewhat different breeds:
Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides. The Harfoots were brownerof skin, smaller, and shorter, and they were beardless andbootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble; and they
preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader,heavier in build; their feet and hands were larger; and theypreferred ﬂat lands and riversides. The Fallohides were fairerof skin and also of hair, and they were taller and slimmerthan the others; they were lovers of trees and of woodlands.
The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient
times, and long lived in the foothills of the mountains. They
moved westward early, and roamed over Eriador as far asWeathertop while the others were still in Wilderland. Theywere the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit,and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined tosettle in one place, and longest preserved their ancestral habitof living in tunnels and holes.
The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River
Anduin, and were less shy of Men. They came west after theHarfoots and followed the course of the Loudwater south-wards; and there many of them long dwelt between Tharbadand the borders of Dunland before they moved north again.
The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly
branch. They were more friendly with Elves than the otherHobbits were, and had more skill in language and song thanin handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to tilling.They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and camedown the River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled withthe other kinds that had preceded them, but being somewhatbolder and more adventurous, they were often found asleaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Evenin Bilbo’s time the strong Fallohidish strain could still benoted among the greater families, such as the Tooks and theMasters of Buckland.
prologue 5
In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains
and the Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and
Elves. Indeed, a remnant still dwelt there of the Du ´nedain, the
kings of Men that came over the Sea out of Westernesse; butthey were dwindling fast and the lands of their North King-dom were falling far and wide into waste. There was roomand to spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began
to settle in ordered communities. Most of their earlier settle-ments had long disappeared and been forgotten in Bilbo’stime; but one of the ﬁrst to become important still endured,though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwoodthat lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire.
It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits
learned their letters and began to write after the manner of
the Du ´nedain, who had in their turn long before learned the
art from the Elves. And in those days also they forgot what-ever languages they had used before, and spoke ever after theCommon Speech, the Westron as it was named, that wascurrent through all the lands of the kings from Arnor toGondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas toLune. Yet they kept a few words of their own, as well as theirown names of months and days, and a great store of personalnames out of the past.
About this time legend among the Hobbits ﬁrst becomes
history with a reckoning of years. For it was in the one thou-sand six hundred and ﬁrst year of the Third Age that theFallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out from Bree;and having obtained permission from the high king atFornost, *they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a
great following of Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge ofStonebows, that had been built in the days of the power ofthe North Kingdom, and they took all the land beyond todwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was
*As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II, the twentieth
of the Northern line, which came to an end with Arvedui three hundred
years later.
6 prologue
demanded of them was that they should keep the Great
Bridge in repair, and all other bridges and roads, speed the
king’s messengers, and acknowledge his lordship.
Thus began the Shire-reckoning , for the year of the crossing
of the Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) becameYear One of the Shire, and all later dates were reckoned fromit.*At once the western Hobbits fell in love with their new
land, and they remained there, and soon passed once more
out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was stilla king they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact,ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not at all withevents in the world outside. To the last battle at Fornost withthe Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen to the aidof the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men
record it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; andthen the Hobbits took the land for their own, and they chosefrom their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of theking that was gone. There for a thousand years they werelittle troubled by wars, and they prospered and multipliedafter the Dark Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of the Long
Winter and the famine that followed it. Many thousands thenperished, but the Days of Dearth ( 1158 –60) were at the time
of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again becomeaccustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, andthough it had long been deserted when they entered it, it hadbefore been well tilled, and there the king had once had manyfarms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.
Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the
Brandywine Bridge, and ﬁfty from the northern moors tothe marshes in the south. The Hobbits named it the Shire,as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a districtof well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant corner ofthe world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and
*Thus, the years of the Third Age in the reckoning of the Elves and
the Du ´nedain may be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shire-
reckoning.
prologue 7
they heeded less and less the world outside where dark things
moved, until they came to think that peace and plenty were
the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible folk.They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known ofthe Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possiblethe long peace of the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, butthey had ceased to remember it.
At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they
had never fought among themselves. In olden days they had,
of course, been often obliged to ﬁght to maintain themselvesin a hard world; but in Bilbo’s time that was very ancienthistory. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeedthe only one that had ever been fought within the bordersof the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of
Greenﬁelds, S.R. 1147 , in which Bandobras Took routed an
invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, andthe wolves that had once come ravening out of the North inbitter white winters were now only a grandfather’s tale. So,though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire,these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths oron walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving.The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbitshad no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away,they called a mathom . Their dwellings were apt to become
rather crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents thatpassed from hand to hand were of that sort.
Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curi-
ously tough. They were, if it came to it, difﬁcult to daunt orto kill; and they were, perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of goodthings not least because they could, when put to it, do withoutthem, and could survive rough handling by grief, foe, orweather in a way that astonished those who did not knowthem well and looked no further than their bellies and theirwell-fed faces. Though slow to quarrel, and for sport killingnothing that lived, they were doughty at bay, and at needcould still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, for theywere keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and
8 prologue
arrows. If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get
quickly under cover, as all trespassing beasts knew very well.
All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or
so they believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at
home; but in the course of time they had been obliged toadopt other forms of abode. Actually in the Shire in Bilbo’sdays it was, as a rule, only the richest and the poorest Hobbits
that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on livingin burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed,with only one window or none; while the well-to-do stillconstructed more luxurious versions of the simple diggingsof old. But suitable sites for these large and ramifying tunnels(orsmials as they called them) were not everywhere to be
found; and in the ﬂats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits,
as they multiplied, began to build above ground. Indeed, evenin the hilly regions and the older villages, such as Hobbitonor Tuckborough, or in the chief township of the Shire, MichelDelving on the White Downs, there were now many housesof wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured bymillers, smiths, ropers, and cartwrights, and others of thatsort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits hadlong been accustomed to build sheds and workshops.
The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to
have begun among the inhabitants of the Marish down bythe Brandywine. The Hobbits of that quarter, the East-farthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they woredwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known tobe Stoors in a large part of their blood, as indeed was shownby the down that many grew on their chins. No Harfoot orFallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk of theMarish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they after-wards occupied, came for the most part later into the Shireup from south-away; and they still had many peculiar namesand strange words not found elsewhere in the Shire.
It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts
beside, was derived from the Du ´nedain. But the Hobbits may
have learned it direct from the Elves, the teachers of Men in
prologue 9
their youth. For the Elves of the High Kindred had not yet
forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that time at the
Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places withinreach of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age werestill to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the westernmarches. They shone far off in the moonlight. The tallestwas furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. The
Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Seafrom the top of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever beenknown to climb it. Indeed, few Hobbits had ever seen orsailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever returned toreport it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boatswith deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim.And as the days of the Shire lengthened they spoke less and
less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustfulof those that had dealings with them; and the Sea became aword of fear among them, and a token of death, and theyturned their faces away from the hills in the west.
The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men,
but the Hobbits used it in their own fashion. They did notgo in for towers. Their houses were usually long, low, andcomfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no more thanbuilt imitations of smials , thatched with dry grass or straw, or
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. Thatstage, however, belonged to the early days of the Shire, andhobbit-building had long since been altered, improved bydevices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by themselves.A preference for round windows, and even round doors, wasthe chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture.
The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large,
and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Bagginswere as bachelors very exceptional, as they were also in manyother ways, such as their friendship with the Elves.) Some-times, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or theBrandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relativeslived in (comparative) peace together in one ancestral andmany-tunnelled mansion. All Hobbits were, in any case,
10 prologue
clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great care.
They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to rememberwho is related to whom, and in what degree. It would beimpossible in this book to set out a family-tree that includedeven the more important members of the more importantfamilies at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a smallbook in themselves, and all but Hobbits would ﬁnd themexceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted in such things, if they wereaccurate: they liked to have books ﬁlled with things that theyalready knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions.
2
Concerning Pipe-weed
There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that
must be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed orinhaled, through pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of theburning leaves of a herb, which they called pipe-weed orleaf,
a variety probably of Nicotiana . A great deal of mystery
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or ‘art’ as theHobbits preferred to call it. All that could be discovered aboutit in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck(later Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of
the Southfarthing play a part in the history that follows, his
remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may
be quoted.
‘This,’ he says, ‘is the one art that we can certainly claim
to be our own invention. When Hobbits ﬁrst began to smokeis not known, all the legends and family histories take it forgranted; for ages folk in the Shire smoked various herbs, somefouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that ToboldHornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing ﬁrst grewthe true pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim theSecond, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best
prologue 11
home-grown still comes from that district, especially the
varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and
Southern Star.
‘How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to
his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs,but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he wentoften to Bree, though he certainly never went further from
the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learnedof this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well onthe south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to havebeen the ﬁrst actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim,of course, to have done everything before the people of theShire, whom they refer to as ‘‘colonists’’; but in this case theirclaim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from
Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread inthe recent centuries among Dwarves and such other folk,Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still passed to and frothrough that ancient road-meeting. The home and centre ofthe art is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing
Pony , that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from
time beyond record.
‘All the same, observations that I have made on my own
many journeys south have convinced me that the weed itselfis not native to our parts of the world, but came northwardfrom the lower Anduin, whither it was, I suspect, originallybrought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows abund-antly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in theNorth, where it is never found wild, and ﬂourishes only inwarm sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gondorcall it sweet galenas , and esteem it only for the fragrance of its
ﬂowers. From that land it must have been carried up theGreenway during the long centuries between the coming ofElendil and our own days. But even the Du ´nedain of Gondor
allow us this credit: Hobbits ﬁrst put it into pipes. Not eventhe Wizards ﬁrst thought of that before we did. Though oneWizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became asskilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.’
12 prologue
3
Of the Ordering of the Shire
The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings
already referred to, North, South, East, and West; and theseagain each into a number of folklands, which still bore the
names of some of the old leading families, although by thetime of this history these names were no longer found onlyin their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in theTookland, but that was not true of many other families, suchas the Bagginses or the Bofﬁns. Outside the Farthings werethe East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 129); and the
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452 .
The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’.
Families for the most part managed their own affairs. Grow-
ing food and eating it occupied most of their time. Inother matters they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy,but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, work-shops, and small trades tended to remain unchanged forgenerations.
There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concern-
ing the high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it,away north of the Shire. But there had been no king for nearlya thousand years, and even the ruins of Kings’ Norbury werecovered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild folk andwicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of theking. For they attributed to the king of old all their essentiallaws; and usually they kept the laws of free will, because theywere The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just.
It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent;
for the ofﬁce of Thain had passed to them (from the Old-bucks) some centuries before, and the chief Took had bornethat title ever since. The Thain was the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in-arms; but as muster and moot were only held in times ofemergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship hadceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took family
prologue 13
was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained
both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to
produce in every generation strong characters of peculiarhabits and even adventurous temperament. The latter quali-ties, however, were now rather tolerated (in the rich) thangenerally approved. The custom endured, nonetheless, ofreferring to the head of the family as The Took, and of
adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrimthe Second, for instance.
The only real ofﬁcial in the Shire at this date was the Mayor
of Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected everyseven years at the Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe,that is at Midsummer. As mayor almost his only duty wasto preside at banquets, given on the Shire-holidays, which
occurred at frequent intervals. But the ofﬁces of Postmasterand First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that hemanaged both the Messenger Service and the Watch. Thesewere the only Shire-services, and the Messengers were themost numerous, and much the busier of the two. By nomeans all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were wroteconstantly to all their friends (and a selection of theirrelations) who lived further off than an afternoon’s walk.
The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their
police, or the nearest equivalent that they possessed. Theyhad, of course, no uniforms (such things being quite un-known), only a feather in their caps; and they were in practicerather haywards than policemen, more concerned with thestrayings of beasts than of people. There were in all the Shireonly twelve of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work.A rather larger body, varying at need, was employed to ‘beatthe bounds’, and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great orsmall, did not make themselves a nuisance.
At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they
were called, had been greatly increased. There were manyreports and complaints of strange persons and creaturesprowling about the borders, or over them: the ﬁrst sign thatall was not quite as it should be, and always had been except
14 prologue
in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and
not even Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty
years had passed since he set out on his memorable journey,and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundredas often as not; but much evidently still remained of theconsiderable wealth that he had brought back. How much orhow little he revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favour-
ite ‘nephew’. And he still kept secret the ring that he hadfound.
4
Of the Finding of the Ring
As is told in The Hobbit , there came one day to Bilbo’s door the
great Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with
him: none other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descend-ant of kings, and his twelve companions in exile. With themhe set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning ofApril, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest
of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under theMountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East. Thequest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the hoardwas destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle ofFive Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and manydeeds of renown were done, the matter would scarcely haveconcerned later history, or earned more than a note inthe long annals of the Third Age, but for an ‘accident’ by theway. The party was assailed by Orcs in a high pass of theMisty Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so ithappened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped invain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the ﬂoorof a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mereluck.
Trying to ﬁnd his way out, Bilbo went on down to the
roots of the mountains, until he could go no further. At the
prologue 15
bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and
on an island of rock in the water lived Gollum. He was a
loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with hislarge ﬂat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catchingblind ﬁsh with his long ﬁngers, and eating them raw. He ateany living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle itwithout a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had
come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: aring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the onething he loved, his ‘Precious’, and he talked to it, even whenit was not with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole onhis island, except when he was hunting or spying on the orcsof the mines.
Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring
had been on him when they met; but it was not, and the
hobbit held in his hand an Elvish knife, which served him asa sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo to theRiddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbocould not guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but ifBilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished: hewould lead him to a way out of the tunnels.
Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could
neither go on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; andthey asked one another many riddles. In the end Bilbo wonthe game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for hewas stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as hishand came upon the ring he had picked up and forgotten:What have I got in my pocket? This Gollum failed to answer,
though he demanded three guesses.
The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question
was a mere ‘question’ and not a ‘riddle’ according to the strictrules of the Game; but all agree that, after accepting it andtrying to guess the answer, Gollum was bound by hispromise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; for thethought came to him that this slimy creature might provefalse, even though such promises were held sacred, and ofold all but the wickedest things feared to break them. But
16 prologue
after ages alone in the dark Gollum’s heart was black, and
treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to his
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the darkwater. There, he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now,and angry, and once his ‘Precious’ was with him he wouldnot fear any weapon at all.
But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was
gone. His screech sent a shiver down Bilbo’s back, though he
did not yet understand what had happened. But Gollum hadat last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its
pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green
ﬂame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his‘Precious’. Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he ﬂed blindlyup the passage away from the water; and once more he was
saved by his luck. For as he ran he put his hand in his pocket,and the ring slipped quietly on to his ﬁnger. So it was thatGollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guardthe way out, lest the ‘thief’ should escape. Warily Bilbo fol-lowed him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himselfabout his ‘Precious’; from which talk at last even Bilboguessed the truth, and hope came to him in the darkness: hehimself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of escapefrom the orcs and from Gollum.
At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening
that led to the lower gates of the mines, on the eastward sideof the mountains. There Gollum crouched at bay, smellingand listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay him with hissword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, inwhich his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him killthe wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the end, gatheringhis courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and ﬂedaway down the passage, pursued by his enemy’s cries of hateand despair: Thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it for ever!
Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo
ﬁrst told it to his companions. To them his account was thatGollum had promised to give him a present , if he won the
prologue 17
game; but when Gollum went to fetch it from his island he
found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that thiswas the very ring that he had found, and as he had won thegame, it was already his by right. But being in a tight place,he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him theway out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have alteredit himself, not even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently itstill appeared in the original Red Book, as it did in several ofthe copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the trueaccount (as an alternative), derived no doubt from notes byFrodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, thoughthey seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually
written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s ﬁrst story, as soon
as he heard it, and he continued to be very curious about thering. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after muchquestioning, which for a while strained their friendship; butthe wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though hedid not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, anddisturbing, to ﬁnd that the good hobbit had not told thetruth from the ﬁrst: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same. Itwas suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talkthat he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his‘birthday-present’, many times. That also Gandalf thoughtstrange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truthin this point for many more years, as will be seen in thisbook.
Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here.
With the help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards atthe gate and rejoined his companions. He used the ring manytimes on his quest, chieﬂy for the help of his friends; but hekept it secret from them as long as he could. After his returnto his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf
18 note on the shire records
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence,
or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of
his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his ﬁreplace, and his
coat of marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from theDragon-hoard, he lent to a museum, to the Michel DelvingMathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer at Bag End
the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels;and the ring, secured by a ﬁne chain, remained in hispocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in
his ﬁfty-second year (S.R. 1342 ), and nothing very notable
occurred in the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the prep-arations for the celebration of his hundred-and-eleventh
birthday (S.R. 1401 ). At this point this History begins.
note on the shire records
At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits
in the great events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in theReunited Kingdom awakened among them a more wide-
spread interest in their own history; and many of their tra-
ditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected andwritten down. The greater families were also concerned withevents in the Kingdom at large, and many of their membersstudied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the
ﬁrst century of the Fourth Age there were already to be foundin the Shire several libraries that contained many historicalbooks and records.
The largest of these collections were probably at Under-
towers, at Great Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account ofthe end of the Third Age is drawn mainly from the Red Book
of Westmarch. That most important source for the historyof the War of the Ring was so called because it was longpreserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns,
note on the shire records 19
Wardens of the Westmarch. *It was in origin Bilbo’s private
diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought it
back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes,and during S.R. 1420 –1he nearly ﬁlled its pages with his
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it,probably in a single red case, were the three large volumes,bound in red leather, that Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift.
To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch aﬁfth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various othermatter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship.
The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many
copies were made, especially of the ﬁrst volume, for the useof the descendants of the children of Master Samwise. Themost important copy, however, has a different history. It was
kept at Great Smials, but it was written in Gondor, probablyat the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and com-pleted in S.R. 1592 (F.A.172). Its southern scribe appended
this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, ﬁnished this work in IV172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in
Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request ofKing Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and wasbrought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired toGondor in IV 64.
The Thain’s Book was thus the ﬁrst copy made of the Red
Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. InMinas Tirith it received much annotation, and many correc-tions, especially of names, words, and quotations in the Elvishlanguages; and there was added to it an abbreviated versionof those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie
outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to havebeen written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir,some time after the passing of the King. But the chief impor-tance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains the whole ofBilbo’s ‘Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes
*See Appendix B: annals 1451 ,1462 ,1482 ; and note at end of
Appendix C.
20 note on the shire records
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which,
between1403 and1418 , he had used all the sources available
to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But since they
were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely concernedwith the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.
Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their
great families, and at the same time kept up their connexions
with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury andTuckborough contained much that did not appear in the RedBook. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing withEriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these werecomposed or begun by Meriadoc himself, though in the Shirehe was chieﬂy remembered for his Herblore of the Shire , and
for his Reckoning of Years in which he discussed the relation
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell,
Gondor, and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old
Words and Names in the Shire , showing special interest in
discovering the kinship with the language of the Rohirrimof such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and old elements in place
names.
At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-
folk, though more important for larger history. None of themwas written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collectedmany manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainlycopies or summaries of histories or legends relating to Elendiland his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found exten-sive materials for the history of Nu ´menor and the arising of
Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The Tale of
Years *was put together, with the assistance of material
collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are oftenconjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve atten-tion. It is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance andinformation from Rivendell, which he visited more than once.There, though Elrond had departed, his sons long remained,
*Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the
end of the Third Age.
note on the shire records 21
together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said that
Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of Galadriel;
but there is no record of the day when at last he sought theGrey Havens, and with him went the last living memory ofthe Elder Days in Middle-earth.
.
THE FELLOWSHIP
OF THE RING
being the first part
of
The Lord of the Rings
.
BOOK ONE
.
Chapter1
A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY
When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he
would shortly be celebrating his eleventy-ﬁrst birthday witha party of special magniﬁcence, there was much talk and
excitement in Hobbiton.
Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the
wonder of the Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable
disappearance and unexpected return. The riches he hadbrought back from his travels had now become a local legend,
and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk mightsay, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed withtreasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was alsohis prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but itseemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety he wasmuch the same as at ﬁfty. At ninety-nine they began to call
himwell-preserved ; but unchanged would have been nearer the
mark. There were some that shook their heads and thoughtthis was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair thatanyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as wellas (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and
trouble will come of it!’
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was
generous with his money, most people were willing to for-give him his oddities and his good fortune. He remainedon visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course, theSackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirersamong the hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But hehad no close friends, until some of his younger cousins beganto grow up.
28 the fellowship of the ring
The eldest of these, and Bilbo’s favourite, was young Frodo
Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine he adopted Frodo as
his heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes ofthe Sackville-Bagginses were ﬁnally dashed. Bilbo and Frodohappened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You
had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,’ said Bilboone day; ‘and then we can celebrate our birthday-parties
comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was still in histweens , as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties
between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had
given very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; butnow it was understood that something quite exceptional
was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to beeleventy-one ,111, a rather curious number, and a very re-
spectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had onlyreached130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three ,33,a n
important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and
rumour of the coming event travelled all over the Shire. Thehistory and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became onceagain the chief topic of conversation; and the older folksuddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham
Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth atThe Ivy Bush , a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke
with some authority, for he had tended the garden at BagEnd for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the samejob before that. Now that he was himself growing old andstiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his young-est son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on veryfriendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hillitself, in Number 3Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve
always said,’ the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbowas very polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and
a long-expected party 29
consulting him constantly upon the growing of vegetables –
in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer was
recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbour-hood (including himself).
‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old
Noakes of Bywater. ‘Baggins is his name, but he’s more thanhalf a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins
of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there inBuckland, where folks are so queer.’
‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot
(the Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrongside of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest.That’s a dark bad place, if half the tales be true.’
‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not that the Brandy-
bucks of Buckland live inthe Old Forest; but they’re a queer
breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big
river – and that isn’t natural. Small wonder that trouble cameof it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice ayoung hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much likeMr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all his father wasa Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. DrogoBaggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he wasdrownded.’
‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and
other darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have apassion for family history, and they were ready to hear itagain.
‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo,
he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr.Bilbo’s ﬁrst cousin on the mother’s side (her mother beingthe youngest of the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogowas his second cousin. So Mr. Frodo is his ﬁrst andsecond
cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is, if youfollow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall withhis father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often didafter his marriage (him being partial to his vittles, and oldGorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out
30 the fellowship of the ring
boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were
drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all.’
‘I’ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the
moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was Drogo’s weight as
sunk the boat.’
‘And Iheard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after
him,’ said Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller.
‘You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the
Gaffer, who did not much like the miller. ‘There isn’t no call
to go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite trickyenough for those that sit still without looking further for thecause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo left anorphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queerBucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A
regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc neverhad fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place.Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he brought thelad back to live among decent folk.
‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those Sackville-
Bagginses. They thought they were going to get Bag End,that time when he went off and was thought to be dead. Andthen he comes back and orders them off; and he goes onliving and living, and never looking a day older, bless him!And suddenly he produces an heir, and has all the papersmade out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t never seethe inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’
‘There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear
tell,’ said a stranger, a visitor on business from MichelDelving in the Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is full oftunnels packed with chests of gold and silver, andjools, by
what I’ve heard.’
‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered
the Gaffer. ‘I know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with
his money, and there seems no lack of it; but I know of notunnel-making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matterof sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I’d not long comeprentice to old Holman (him being my dad’s cousin), but he
a long-expected party 31
had me up at Bag End helping him to keep folks from tram-
pling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was
on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hillwith a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests.I don’t doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had pickedup in foreign parts, where there be mountains of gold, theysay; but there wasn’t enough to ﬁll tunnels. But my lad Sam
will know more about that. He’s in and out of Bag End.Crazy about stories of the old days, he is, and he listens toall Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters –meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will comeof it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are
better for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business
of your betters, or you’ll land in trouble too big for you , I says to
him. And I might say it to others,’ he added with a look atthe stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend
of Bilbo’s wealth was now too ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the minds ofthe younger generation of hobbits.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he
brought at ﬁrst,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion.‘He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish folkthat visit him: dwarves coming at night, and that old wanderingconjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like, Gaffer,but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what youlike, about what you know no
more of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retortedthe Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’sbeing queer, then we could do with a bit more queerness inthese parts. There’s some not far away that wouldn’t offer apint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with goldenwalls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam saysthat everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s
going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this verymonth as is.’
***
32 the fellowship of the ring
That very month was September, and as ﬁne as you could
ask. A day or two later a rumour (probably started by the
knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were goingto be ﬁreworks – ﬁreworks, what is more, such as had notbeen seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed sincethe Old Took died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking
waggon laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbi-
ton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. Thestartled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. Itwas driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarveswith long beards and deep hoods. A few of them remainedat Bag End. At the end of the second week in September acart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandy-
wine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it allalone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, anda silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrowsthat stuck out beyond the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right upthe hill. It had a cargo of ﬁreworks, as they rightly guessed.At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload: therewere great bundles of ﬁreworks of all sorts and shapes, eachlabelled with a large red G
and the elf-rune,
 .
That was Gandalf’s mark, of course, and the old man
was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due
mainly to his skill with ﬁres, smokes, and lights. His real
business was far more difﬁcult and dangerous, but theShire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just oneof the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement ofthe hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the
old man smiled. They knew him by sight, though he onlyappeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long;but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders hadseen one of his ﬁrework displays – they now belonged to alegendary past.
When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves,
had ﬁnished unloading, Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but
a long-expected party 33
not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the dis-
appointment of the onlookers.
‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when
the time comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and
the door was shut. The young hobbits stared at the door invain for a while, and then made off, feeling that the day ofthe party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open
window of a small room looking out west on to the garden.
The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The ﬂowersglowed red and golden: snap-dragons and sunﬂowers, andnasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in atthe round windows.
‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf.
‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all
the dear old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’
‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t
changed it.’
‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your
plan – your whole plan, mind – and I hope it will turn outfor the best, for you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday,
and have my little joke.’
‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head.‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo.
The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more
carts. There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing
locally’, but that very week orders began to pour out of BagEnd for every kind of provision, commodity, or luxury thatcould be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere inthe neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and theybegan to tick off the days on the calendar; and they watchedeagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the
34 the fellowship of the ring
Hobbiton post-ofﬁce was blocked, and the Bywater post-
ofﬁce was snowed under, and voluntary assistant postmen
were called for. There was a constant stream of them goingup the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank
you, I shall certainly come .
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admit -
tance except on p arty business . Even those who had,
or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed
inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking offanswers, packing up presents, and making some privatepreparations of his own. From the time of Gandalf’s arrivalhe remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to ﬁnd the large ﬁeld, south
of Bilbo’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents
and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bankleading to the road, and wide steps and a large white gatewere built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,adjoining the ﬁeld, were intensely interested and generallyenvied. Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to workin his garden.
The tents began to go up. There was a specially large
pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the ﬁeld was rightinside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head ofthe chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its branches.More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormousopen-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the ﬁeld.A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house formiles around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and otherodd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose toits height.
Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday
the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday,September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the
clouds vanished, ﬂags were unfurled and the fun began.
Bilbo Baggins called it a party , but it was really a variety
of entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody livingnear was invited. A very few were overlooked by accident,
a long-expected party 35
but as they turned up all the same, that did not matter. Many
people from other parts of the Shire were also asked; and
there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo metthe guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person.He gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter werethose who went out again by a back way and came in againby the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their
own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and notso lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system.Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year wassomebody’s birthday, so that every hobbit in those parts hada fair chance of at least one present at least once a week. Butthey never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The
hobbit-children were so excited that for a while they almost
forgot about eating. There were toys the like of which theyhad never seen before, all beautiful and some obviously magi-cal. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,and had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale,and were of real dwarf-make.
When every guest had been welcomed and was ﬁnally
inside the gate, there were songs, dances, music, games, and,of course, food and drink. There were three ofﬁcial meals:lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and tea weremarked chieﬂy by the fact that at those times all the guestswere sitting down and eating together. At other times therewere merely lots of people eating and drinking – continuouslyfrom elevenses until six-thirty, when the ﬁreworks started.
The ﬁreworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought
by him, but designed and made by him; and the specialeffects, set pieces, and ﬂights of rockets were let off byhim. But there was also a generous distribution of squibs,crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, elf-fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-claps. They were allsuperb. The art of Gandalf improved with age.
There were rockets like a ﬂight of scintillating birds singing
with sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark
36 the fellowship of the ring
smoke: their leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a
moment, and their shining branches dropped glowing ﬂowers
down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with a sweetscent just before they touched their upturned faces. Therewere fountains of butterﬂies that ﬂew glittering into the trees;there were pillars of coloured ﬁres that rose and turned intoeagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of ﬂying swans; there
was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; therewas a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the airwith a yell like an embattled army, and came down again intothe Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And therewas also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startledthe hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights wentout. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like a mountain
seen in the distance, and began to glow at the summit. Itspouted green and scarlet ﬂames. Out ﬂew a red-goldendragon – not life-size, but terribly life-like: ﬁre came from hisjaws, his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzedthree times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked,and many fell ﬂat on their faces. The dragon passed like anexpress train, turned a somersault, and burst over Bywaterwith a deafening explosion.
‘That is the signal for supper!’ said Bilbo. The pain and
alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped totheir feet. There was a splendid supper for everyone; foreveryone, that is, except those invited to the special familydinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with thetree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a numberalso called by the hobbits one Gross, though the word wasnot considered proper to use of people); and the guests wereselected from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo wererelated, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends(such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, andpresent by parental permission; for hobbits were easy-goingwith their children in the matter of sitting up late, especiallywhen there was a chance of getting them a free meal. Bringingup young hobbits took a lot of provender.
a long-expected party 37
There were many Bagginses and Bofﬁns, and also many
Tooks and Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (re-
lations of Bilbo Baggins’ grandmother), and various Chubbs(connexions of his Took grandfather); and a selection ofBurrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only verydistantly connected with Bilbo, and some had hardly ever
been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote corners ofthe Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten. Othoand his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo anddetested Frodo, but so magniﬁcent was the invitation card,written in golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible torefuse. Besides, their cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing infood for many years and his table had a high reputation.
All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleas-
ant feast; though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech
of their host (an inevitable item). He was liable to drag in bitsof what he called poetry; and sometimes, after a glass ortwo, would allude to the absurd adventures of his mysteriousjourney. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich,abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase of provisionsfell almost to nothing throughout the district in the ensuingweeks; but as Bilbo’s catering had depleted the stocks of mostof the stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, thatdid not matter much.
After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of
the company were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at thatdelightful stage which they called ‘ﬁlling up the corners’.They were sipping their favourite drinks, and nibbling at theirfavourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. They wereprepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.
My dear People , began Bilbo, rising in his place. ‘Hear!
Hear! Hear!’ they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus,seeming reluctant to follow their own advice. Bilbo left hisplace and went and stood on a chair under the illuminatedtree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face; the
38 the fellowship of the ring
golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They
could all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the
other was in his trouser-pocket.
My dear Bagginses and Bofﬁns , he began again; and my
dear Tooks and Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, andBurrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Good-bodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots. ‘Proudfeet !’ shouted an
elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of
course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large,exceptionally furry, and both were on the table.
Proudfoots , repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses
that I welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundredand eleventh birthday: I am eleventy-one today! ‘Hurray! Hur-
ray! Many Happy Returns!’ they shouted, and they ham-
mered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing splendidly.This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.
I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deaf-
ening cheers. Cries of Yes(and No). Noises of trumpets and
horns, pipes and ﬂutes, and other musical instruments. Therewere, as has been said, many young hobbits present. Hun-dreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of thembore the mark dale on them; which did not convey much to
most of the hobbits, but they all agreed they were marvellouscrackers. They contained instruments, small, but of perfectmake and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one corner some ofthe young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilboto have ﬁnished (since he had plainly said all that was neces-sary), now got up an impromptu orchestra, and began amerry dance-tune. Master Everard Took and Miss MelilotBrandybuck got on a table and with bells in their handsbegan to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rathervigorous.
But Bilbo had not ﬁnished. Seizing a horn from a youngster
nearby, he blew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. I shall
not keep you long , he cried. Cheers from all the assembly. I
have called you all together for a Purpose. Something in the
way that he said this made an impression. There was almost
a long-expected party 39
silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.
Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am
immensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too
short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits.Tremendous outburst of approval.
I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I
like less than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was
unexpected and rather difﬁcult. There was some scattered
clapping, but most of them were trying to work it out andsee if it came to a compliment.
Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should
say: OUR birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of myheir and nephew, Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritancetoday. Some perfunctory clapping by the elders; and some
loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old Frodo,’ from the
juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wonderedwhat was meant by ‘coming into his inheritance’.
Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers
were chosen to ﬁt this remarkable total: One Gross, if I may usethe expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of the
guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,feeling sure they had only been asked to ﬁll up the requirednumber, like goods in a package. ‘One Gross, indeed! Vulgarexpression.’
It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the LongLake; though the fact that it was my birthday slipped my memoryon that occasion. I was only ﬁfty-one then, and birthdays did notseem so important. The banquet was very splendid, however,though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and could onlysay ‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly: Thankyou very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence.
They all feared that a song or some poetry was now immi-nent; and they were getting bored. Why couldn’t he stoptalking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo did not singor recite. He paused for a moment.
Thirdly and ﬁnally , he said, I wish to make an
40 the fellowship of the ring
ANNOUNCEMENT. He spoke this last word so loudly and
suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. I regret to
announce that – though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too
short a time to spend among you – this is the END. I am going.I am leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding ﬂash
of light, and the guests all blinked. When they opened their
eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty-four ﬂabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless. Old OdoProudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped.Then there was a dead silence, until suddenly, after severaldeep breaths, every Baggins, Bofﬁn, Took, Brandybuck,
Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse,Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.
It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste,
and more food and drink were needed to cure the guests ofshock and annoyance. ‘He’s mad. I always said so,’ wasprobably the most popular comment. Even the Tooks (witha few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. Forthe moment most of them took it for granted that hisdisappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous prank.
But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor
an enormous dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to hisdaughter-in-law, Esmeralda: ‘There’s something ﬁshy in this,my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off again. Silly oldfool. But why worry? He hasn’t taken the vittles with him.’He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.
Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For
some time he had sat silent beside Bilbo’s empty chair, andignored all remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke,of course, even though he had been in the know. He haddifﬁculty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surpriseof the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled:he realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Mostof the guests went on eating and drinking and discussingBilbo Baggins’ oddities, past and present; but the Sackville-
a long-expected party 41
Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo did not want
to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for
more wine to be served; then he got up and drained his ownglass silently to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of thepavilion.
As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech,
he had been ﬁngering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic
ring that he had kept secret for so many years. As he steppeddown he slipped it on his ﬁnger, and he was never seen byany hobbit in Hobbiton again.
He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment
listening with a smile to the din in the pavilion, and to the
sounds of merrymaking in other parts of the ﬁeld. Then hewent in. He took off his party clothes, folded up and wrappedin tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and put itaway. Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments,and fastened round his waist a worn leather belt. On it hehung a short sword in a battered black-leather scabbard.From a locked drawer, smelling of moth-balls, he tookout an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as ifthey were very precious, but they were so patched andweatherstained that their original colour could hardly beguessed: it might have been dark green. They were rather toolarge for him. He then went into his study, and from a largestrong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and aleather-bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope.The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bagthat was standing there, already nearly full. Into the enve-lope he slipped his golden ring, and its ﬁne chain, and thensealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At ﬁrst he put it on themantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in hispocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf camequickly in.
‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’‘I am glad to ﬁnd you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting
down in a chair, ‘I wanted to catch you and have a few
42 the fellowship of the ring
ﬁnal words. I suppose you feel that everything has gone off
splendidly and according to plan?’
‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. ‘Though that ﬂash was surprising:
it quite startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of
your own, I suppose?’
‘It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years,
and it seemed to me necessary to give your guests something
else that would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’
‘And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busy-
body,’ laughed Bilbo, ‘but I expect you know best, as usual.’
‘I do – when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure
about this whole affair. It has now come to the ﬁnal point.You have had your joke, and alarmed or offended most ofyour relations, and given the whole Shire something to talk
about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are you goingany further?’
‘Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as
I have told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don’texpect I shall return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I havemade all arrangements.
‘I am old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning
to feel it in my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!’ he
snorted. ‘Why, I feel all thin, sort of stretched , if you know
what I mean: like butter that has been scraped over too muchbread. That can’t be right. I need a change, or something.’
Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does
not seem right,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘No, after all I believeyour plan is probably the best.’
‘Well, I’ve made up my mind, anyway. I want to see moun-
tains again, Gandalf – mountains ; and then ﬁnd somewhere
where I can rest. In peace and quiet, without a lot of relatives
prying around, and a string of confounded visitors hangingon the bell. I might ﬁnd somewhere where I can ﬁnish mybook. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived
happily ever after to the end of his days. ’
Gandalf laughed. ‘I hope he will. But nobody will read the
book, however it ends.’
a long-expected party 43
‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some
already, as far as it has gone. You’ll keep an eye on Frodo,
won’t you?’
‘Yes, I will – two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’‘He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact
he offered to once, just before the party. But he does notreally want to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before
I die, and the Mountains; but he is still in love with theShire, with woods and ﬁelds and little rivers. He ought to becomfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course,except a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when hegets used to being on his own. It’s time he was his own masternow.’
‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. ‘The ring as well? You agreed
to that, you remember.’
‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo.
‘Where is it?’‘In an envelope, if you must know,’ said Bilbo impatiently.
‘There on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in mypocket!’ He hesitated. ‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softlyto himself. ‘Yet after all, why not? Why shouldn’t it staythere?’
Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a
gleam in his eyes. ‘I think, Bilbo,’ he said quietly, ‘I shouldleave it behind. Don’t you want to?’
‘Well yes – and no. Now it comes to it, I don’t like parting
with it at all, I may say. And I don’t really see why I should.Why do you want me to?’ he asked, and a curious changecame over his voice. It was sharp with suspicion and annoy-ance. ‘You are always badgering me about my ring; but youhave never bothered me about the other things that I got onmy journey.’
‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the
truth. It was important. Magic rings are – well, magical; andthey are rare and curious. I was professionally interested inyour ring, you may say; and I still am. I should like to knowwhere it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think youhave
44 the fellowship of the ring
had it quite long enough. You won’t need it any more, Bilbo,
unless I am quite mistaken.’
Bilbo ﬂushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His
kindly face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he cried. ‘And what
business is it of yours, anyway, to know what I do with myown things? It is my own. I found it. It came to me.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no need to get angry.’
‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you.
My own. My Precious. Yes, my Precious.’
The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only
a ﬂicker in his deep eyes showed that he was startled andindeed alarmed. ‘It has been called that before,’ he said, ‘butnot by you.’
‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the
same once. It’s not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I
say.’
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if
you do, Bilbo,’ he said. ‘You make that clearer with everyword you say. It has got far too much hold on you. Let it go!And then you can go yourself, and be free.’
‘I’ll do as I choose and go as I please,’ said Bilbo obstinately.‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long
life we have been friends, and you owe me something. Come!Do as you promised: give it up!’
‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo.
‘But you won’t get it. I won’t give my Precious away, I tellyou.’ His hand strayed to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf’s eyes ﬂashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry
soon,’ he said. ‘If you say that again, I shall. Then you willsee Gandalf the Grey uncloaked.’ He took a step towards thehobbit, and he seemed to grow tall and menacing; his shadowﬁlled the little room.
Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand
clutching at his pocket. They stood for a while facing oneanother, and the air of the room tingled. Gandalf’s eyesremained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands relaxed, andhe began to tremble.
a long-expected party 45
‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said.
‘You have never been like this before. What is it all about? It
is mine isn’t it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me,if I hadn’t kept it. I’m not a thief, whatever he said.’
‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I
am not one either. I am not trying to rob you, but to helpyou. I wish you would trust me, as you used.’ He turned
away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to dwindle againto an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said.
‘But I felt so queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way notto be bothered with it any more. It has been so growing onmy mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was like an eyelooking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and
disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe, andpulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it up, but I foundI couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why.And I don’t seem able to make up my mind.’
‘Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go
away and leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo,and I will look after him.’
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently
he sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an effort. ‘I will.’ Then heshrugged his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After allthat’s what this party business was all about, really: to giveaway lots of birthday-presents, and somehow make it easierto give it away at the same time. It hasn’t made it any easierin the end, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations.It would quite spoil the joke.’
‘Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the
affair,’ said Gandalf.
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’
He drew a deep breath. ‘And now I really must be starting,or somebody else will catch me. I have said good-bye, and Icouldn’t bear to do it all over again.’ He picked up his bagand moved to the door.
‘You have still got the ring in your pocket,’ said the wizard.
46 the fellowship of the ring
‘Well, so I have!’ cried Bilbo. ‘And my will and all the other
documents too. You had better take it and deliver it for me.
That will be safest.’
‘No, don’t give the ring to me,’ said Gandalf. ‘Put it on the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. Ishall wait for him.’
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set
it by the clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on
the ﬂoor. Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped andseized it and set it in its place. A spasm of anger passedswiftly over the hobbit’s face again. Suddenly it gave way toa look of relief and a laugh.
‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off!’They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick
from the stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out
of different rooms where they had been busy.
‘Is everything ready?’ asked Bilbo. ‘Everything packed and
labelled?’
‘Everything,’ they answered.‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door.It was a ﬁne night, and the black sky was dotted with stars.
He looked up, snifﬁng the air. ‘What fun! What fun to be offagain, off on the Road with dwarves! This is what I havereally been longing for, for years! Good-bye!’ he said, lookingat his old home and bowing to the door. ‘Good-bye, Gandalf!’
‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself!
You are old enough, and perhaps wise enough.’
‘Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am
as happy now as I have ever been, and that is saying a greatdeal. But the time has come. I am being swept off my feet atlast,’ he added, and then in a low voice, as if to himself, hesang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
a long-expected party 47
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word
he turned away from the lights and voices in the ﬁeld andtents, and followed by his three companions went roundinto his garden, and trotted down the long sloping path. Hejumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom, and tookto the meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of windin the grass.
Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the
darkness. ‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo – until our next meet-
ing!’ he said softly and went back indoors.
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in
the dark, deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’‘I wish – I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only
a joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my heart that he reallymeant to go. He always used to joke about serious things. Iwish I had come back sooner, just to see him off.’
‘I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’
said Gandalf. ‘Don’t be too troubled. He’ll be all right – now.He left a packet for you. There it is!’
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced
at it, but did not open it.
‘You’ll ﬁnd his will and all the other documents in there, I
think,’ said the wizard. ‘You are the master of Bag End now.And also, I fancy, you’ll ﬁnd a golden ring.’
‘The ring!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘Has he left me that? I wonder
why. Still, it may be useful.’
‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make
use of it, if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe!Now I am going to bed.’
***
48 the fellowship of the ring
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say
good-bye to the guests. Rumours of strange events had by
now spread all over the ﬁeld, but Frodo would only say no
doubt everything will be cleared up in the morning . About mid-
night carriages came for the important folk. One by onethey rolled away, ﬁlled with full but very unsatisﬁed hobbits.Gardeners came by arrangement, and removed in wheel-
barrows those that had inadvertently remained behind.
Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather
later. Morning went on. People came and began (by orders)to clear away the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, andthe spoons and knives and bottles and plates, and the lanterns,and the ﬂowering shrubs in boxes, and the crumbs andcracker-paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handker-
chiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item). Then anumber of other people came (without orders): Bagginses,and Bofﬁns, and Bolgers, and Tooks, and other guests thatlived or were staying near. By mid-day, when even the best-fed were out and about again, there was a large crowd at BagEnd, uninvited but not unexpected.
Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather
tired and worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he hadnot much more to say than before. His reply to all inquirieswas simply this: ‘Mr. Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far asI know, for good.’ Some of the visitors he invited to comeinside, as Bilbo had left ‘messages’ for them.
Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of
packages and parcels and small articles of furniture. On everyitem there was a label tied. There were several labels of thissort:
For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo ;o n
an umbrella. Adelard had carried off many unlabelled ones.
For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspon-
dence, with love from Bilbo ; on a large waste-paper basket.
Dora was Drogo’s sister and the eldest surviving female rela-tive of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had writtenreams of good advice for more than half a century.
a long-expected party 49
For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B. ;
on a gold pen and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.
For ANGELICA’S use, from Uncle Bilbo ; on a round convex
mirror. She was a young Baggins, and too obviously con-
sidered her face shapely.
For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a con-
tributor ; on an (empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower
of books, and worse than usual at returning them.
For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT ;
on a case of silver spoons. Bilbo believed that she had
acquired a good many of his spoons, while he was away onhis former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When shearrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but shealso took the spoons.
This is only a small selection of the assembled presents.
Bilbo’s residence had got rather cluttered up with things in
the course of his long life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holesto get cluttered up: for which the custom of giving so manybirthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of course,that the birthday-presents were always new; there were one
or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all
around the district; but Bilbo had usually given new presents,and kept those that he received. The old hole was now beingcleared a little.
Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written
out personally by Bilbo, and several had some point, or somejoke. But, of course, most of the things were given wherethey would be wanted and welcome. The poorer hobbits, andespecially those of Bagshot Row, did very well. Old GafferGamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollenwaistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. OldRory Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozenbottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from the South-farthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down byBilbo’s father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him acapital fellow after the ﬁrst bottle.
50 the fellowship of the ring
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of
course, all the chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures,
and more than enough furniture, were left in his possession.There was, however, no sign nor mention of money or jewel-lery: not a penny-piece or a glass bead was given away.
Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour
that the whole household was being distributed free spread
like wildﬁre; and before long the place was packed withpeople who had no business there, but could not be kept out.Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Somepeople tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and otherstried to make off with minor items not addressed to them, or
with anything that seemed unwanted or unwatched. The roadto the gate was blocked with barrows and handcarts.
In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses
arrived. Frodo had retired for a while and left his friendMerry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things. When Otholoudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.
‘He is indisposed,’ he said. ‘He is resting.’‘Hiding, you mean,’ said Lobelia. ‘Anyway we want to see
him and we mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!’
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time
to discover their parting gift of spoons. It did not improvetheir tempers. Eventually they were shown into the study.Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of papers in front ofhim. He looked indisposed – to see Sackville-Bagginses atany rate; and he stood up, ﬁdgeting with something in hispocket. But he spoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began
by offering him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) forvarious valuable and unlabelled things. When Frodo repliedthat only the things specially directed by Bilbo were beinggiven away, they said the whole affair was very ﬁshy.
‘Only one thing is clear to me,’ said Otho, ‘and that is that
you are doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeingthe will.’
a long-expected party 51
Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption
of Frodo. He read the will carefully and snorted. It was,
unfortunately, very clear and correct (according to the legalcustoms of hobbits, which demand among other things sevensignatures of witnesses in red ink).
‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting sixty
years. Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He snapped his ﬁngers under
Frodo’s nose and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easilygot rid of. A little later Frodo came out of the study to seehow things were going on, and found her still about the place,investigating nooks and corners, and tapping the ﬂoors. Heescorted her ﬁrmly off the premises, after he had relievedher of several small (but rather valuable) articles that hadsomehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her face looked as if she
was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing partingremark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step,was:
‘You’ll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go
too? You don’t belong here; you’re no Baggins – you – you’rea Brandybuck!’
‘Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,’
said Frodo as he shut the door on her.
‘It was a compliment,’ said Merry Brandybuck, ‘and so, of
course, not true.’
Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young
hobbits (two Bofﬁns and a Bolger) who were knocking holesin the walls of one of the cellars. Frodo also had a tussle withyoung Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson),who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, where hethought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo’s gold excitedboth curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriouslyobtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows,anyone’s for the ﬁnding – unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out,
Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s time to close theshop, Merry,’ he said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to
52 the fellowship of the ring
anyone today, not even if they bring a battering ram.’ Then
he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at
the front-door. ‘Lobelia again most likely,’ he thought. ‘She
must have thought of something really nasty, and have comeback again to say it. It can wait.’
He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much
louder, but he took no notice. Suddenly the wizard’s head
appeared at the window.
‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right
down your hole and out through the hill,’ he said.
‘My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running
out of the room to the door. ‘Come in! Come in! I thought itwas Lobelia.’
‘Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving
a pony-trap towards Bywater with a face that would have
curdled new milk.’
‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly
tried on Bilbo’s ring. I longed to disappear.’
‘Don’t do that!’ said Gandalf, sitting down. ‘Do be careful
of that ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I havecome to say a last word.’
‘Well, what about it?’‘What do you know already?’‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he
found it, and how he used it: on his journey, I mean.’
‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf.‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’
said Frodo. ‘He told me the true story soon after I cameto live here. He said you had pestered him till he toldyou, so I had better know too. ‘‘No secrets between us,Frodo,’’ he said; ‘‘but they are not to go any further. It’s mineanyway.’’ ’
‘That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think
of it all?’
‘If you mean, inventing all that about a ‘‘present’’, well, I
thought the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see
a long-expected party 53
the point of altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do
so, anyway; and I thought it rather odd.’
‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have
such treasures – if they use them. Let it be a warning to you
to be very careful with it. It may have other powers than justmaking you vanish when you wish to.’
‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo.
‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun
to wonder about the ring, especially since last night. No needto worry. But if you take my advice you will use it veryseldom, or not at all. At least I beg you not to use it in anyway that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say again: keepit safe, and keep it secret!’
‘You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?’
‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to
tell you something when I come back. I am going off at once:so this is good-bye for the present.’ He got up.
‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying
on for at least a week. I was looking forward to your help.’
‘I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind. I may
be away for a good while; but I’ll come and see you again, assoon as I can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip inquietly. I shan’t often be visiting the Shire openly again. Iﬁnd that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am anuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actu-ally accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If youwant to know, there is supposed to be a plot between youand me to get hold of his wealth.’
‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and
Lobelia. How abominable! I would give them Bag End andeverything else, if I could get Bilbo back and go off trampingin the country with him. I love the Shire. But I begin to wish,somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever seehim again.’
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things.
Good-bye now! Take care of yourself! Look out for me,especially at unlikely times! Good-bye!’
54 the fellowship of the ring
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a ﬁnal wave of his
hand, and walked off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought
the old wizard looked unusually bent, almost as if he wascarrying a great weight. The evening was closing in, and hiscloaked ﬁgure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo didnot see him again for a long time.
Chapter2
THE SHADOW OF THE PAST
The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days.
The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was dis-cussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year
and a day, and was remembered much longer than that. It
became a ﬁreside-story for young hobbits; and eventuallyMad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a ﬂashand reappear with bags of jewels and gold, became a favouritecharacter of legend and lived on long after all the true events
were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbour-
hood was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked,had at last gone quite mad, and had run off into the Blue.There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river andcome to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame
was mostly laid on Gandalf.
‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone,
perhaps he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ theysaid. And to all appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone,and he did settle down, but the growth of hobbit-sense wasnot very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to carry onBilbo’s reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning;and the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo’shundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundred-weight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twentyguests were invited and there were several meals at which itsnowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the
custom of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until
they got used to it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was
56 the fellowship of the ring
dead. When they asked: ‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his
shoulders.
He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good
many friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly
descendants of the Old Took) who had as children been fondof Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End. Folco Bofﬁn andFredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and MerryBrandybuck (his real name was Meriadoc, but that wasseldom remembered). Frodo went tramping over the Shirewith them; but more often he wandered by himself, and tothe amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen farfrom home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight.Merry and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times,
as Bilbo had done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also
showed signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retainedthe appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out ofhis tweens. ‘Some folk have all the luck,’ they said; but it wasnot until Frodo approached the usually more sober age ofﬁfty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the ﬁrst shock, found that being his own
master and theMr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant.
For some years he was quite happy and did not worry muchabout the future. But half unknown to himself the regret that
he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found
himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, aboutthe wild lands, and strange visions of mountains that he hadnever seen came into his dreams. He began to say to himself:‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.’ To whichthe other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’
So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his
ﬁftieth birthday was drawing near: ﬁfty was a number thathe felt was somehow signiﬁcant (or ominous); it was at anyrate at that age that adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo.Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths seemed too
the shadow of the past 57
well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay
beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly
white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wanderingfurther aﬁeld and more often by himself; and Merry andhis other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seenwalking and talking with the strange wayfarers that began atthis time to appear in the Shire.
There were rumours of strange things happening in the
world outside; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or
sent any message for several years, Frodo gathered all the newshe could. Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could nowbe seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth
and were no longer concerned with its troubles. There were,however, dwarves on the road in unusual numbers. Theancient East–West Road ran through the Shire to its end at theGrey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way totheir mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits’chief source of news from distant parts – if they wanted any: asa rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more. But nowFrodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seekingrefuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke inwhispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.
That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark
past, like a shadow in the background of their memories; butit was ominous and disquieting. It seemed that the evil powerin Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Councilonly to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds ofMordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. Fromthere the power was spreading far and wide, and away fareast and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs weremultiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, nolonger dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadfulweapons. And there were murmured hints of creatures moreterrible than all these, but they had no name.
***
58 the fellowship of the ring
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary
hobbits. But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began
to hear queer tales; and those whose business took them to theborders saw strange things. The conversation in The Green
Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of Frodo’s
ﬁftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of theShire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still
laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the ﬁre, and
opposite him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and therewere various other rustic hobbits listening to their talk.
‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam.‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear ﬁreside-
tales and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’
‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s
more truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented
the stories anyway? Take dragons now.’
‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them
when I was a youngster, but there’s no call to believe in themnow. There’s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’he said, getting a general laugh.
‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what
about these Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them?They do say that one bigger than a tree was seen up awaybeyond the North Moors not long back.’
‘Who’s they?’
‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Bofﬁn at
Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting.Hesawone.’
‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen
things; and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’
‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking –
walking seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’
‘Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw wasan elm tree,
as like as not.’
‘But this one was walking , I tell you; and there ain’t no elm
tree on the North Moors.’
the shadow of the past 59
‘Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some
laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that
Ted had scored a point.
‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides
our Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossingit, mind you: there are more that are turned back at theborders. The Bounders have never been so busy before.
‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do
say they are going to the harbours, out away beyond the
White Towers.’ Sam waved his arm vaguely: neither he norany of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the oldtowers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it wasan old tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens,from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return.
‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are
going into the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting
the words, shaking his head sadly and solemnly. But Tedlaughed.
‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales.
And I don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail!But I warrant you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyoneelse in the Shire.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed
he had once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to seemore one day. Of all the legends that he had heard in hisearly years such fragments of tales and half-rememberedstories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always movedhim most deeply. ‘There are some, even in these parts, asknow the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said. ‘There’sMr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they weresailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knewmore: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’
‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo
was cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you getyour news from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well,friends, I’m off home. Your good health!’ He drained hismug and went out noisily.
60 the fellowship of the ring
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to
think about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the
Bag End garden, and he would have a busy day tomorrow,if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But Samhad more on his mind than gardening. After a while hesighed, and got up and went out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy
rain. The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly
fading into night. He walked home under the early starsthrough Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softly andthoughtfully.
It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away.
Then he paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good lookat him he went off again. During the next year or two he hadturned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly after dusk, andgoing off without warning before sunrise. He would notdiscuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chieﬂyinterested in small news about Frodo’s health and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years
since Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun tothink that the wizard would never return and had given upall interest in hobbits. But that evening, as Sam was walkinghome and twilight was fading, there came the once familiartap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great
delight. They looked hard at one another.
‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever,
Frodo!’
‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that
Gandalf looked older and more careworn. He pressed himfor news of himself and of the wide world, and soon theywere deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting
with Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright ﬁre
the shadow of the past 61
was on the hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was
in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of
spring was shimmering in the ﬁelds and on the tips of thetrees’ ﬁngers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years
before, when Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a hand-kerchief. His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then,
and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and hisface more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were asbright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with thesame vigour and delight.
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still,
deep in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the darkshadow of the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he
broke the silence.
‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my
ring, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because yousaid that such matters were best left until daylight. Don’t youthink you had better ﬁnish now? You say the ring is danger-ous, far more dangerous than I guess. In what way?’
‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more power-
ful than I ever dared to think at ﬁrst, so powerful that in theend it would utterly overcome anyone of mortal race whopossessed it. It would possess him.
‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic
rings as you call them, and they were, of course, of variouskinds: some more potent and some less. The lesser rings wereonly essays in the craft before it was full-grown, and to theElven-smiths they were but triﬂes – yet still to my minddangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings ofPower, they were perilous.
‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does
not die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merelycontinues, until at last every minute is a weariness. And ifhe often uses the Ring to make himself invisible, he fades:h e
becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks in thetwilight under the eye of the Dark Power that rules the Rings.
62 the fellowship of the ring
Yes, sooner or later – later, if he is strong or well-meaning to
begin with, but neither strength nor good purpose will last –
sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’
‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long
silence. The sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn camein from the garden.
‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length.
‘And how much did Bilbo know?’
‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said
Gandalf. ‘He would certainly never have passed on to you
anything that he thought would be a danger, even though Ipromised to look after you. He thought the ring was verybeautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong
or queer, it was himself. He said that it was ‘‘growing on hismind’’, and he was always worrying about it; but he did notsuspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he hadfound out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seemalways of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded inan odd way, and might suddenly slip off a ﬁnger where ithad been tight.’
‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo,
‘so I have always kept it on its chain.’
‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo
never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the creditfor that to himself, and he was very proud of it. Though hewas getting restless and uneasy. Thin and stretched he said.
A sign that the ring was getting control.’
‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again.‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the
Wise know, Frodo. But if you mean ‘‘known about thisring’’,
well, I still do not know , one might say. There is a last test to
make. But I no longer doubt my guess.
‘When did I ﬁrst begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back
in memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the WhiteCouncil drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just beforethe Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow
the shadow of the past 63
fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring,
as plainly it was – that at least was clear from the ﬁrst. ThenI heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had ‘‘won’’ it, and Icould not believe it. When I at last got the truth out of him,I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to thering beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his ‘‘birthday-
present’’. The lies were too much alike for my comfort.Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set to workon its keeper at once. That was the ﬁrst real warning I hadthat all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings werebetter left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry.There was little else that I could do. I could not take it fromhim without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so
anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps haveconsulted Saruman the White, but something always heldme back.’
‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him
before.’
‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no
concern of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is thechief of my order and the head of the Council. His knowledgeis deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill anymeddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is hisprovince. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets oftheir making; but when the Rings were debated in the Coun-cil, all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore told againstmy fears. So my doubt slept – but uneasily. Still I watchedand I waited.
‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed.
Yes, they passed, and they seemed not to touch him. Heshowed no signs of age. The shadow fell on me again. But Isaid to myself: ‘‘After all he comes of a long-lived family onhis mother’s side. There is time yet. Wait!’’
‘And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He
said and did things then that ﬁlled me with a fear that nowords of Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something
64 the fellowship of the ring
dark and deadly was at work. And I have spent most of the
years since then in ﬁnding out the truth of it.’
‘There wasn’t any permanent harm done, was there?’ asked
Frodo anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t
he? Be able to rest in peace, I mean?’
‘He felt better at once,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is only one
Power in this world that knows all about the Rings and their
effects; and as far as I know there is no Power in the worldthat knows all about hobbits. Among the Wise I am theonly one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch ofknowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be,and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likelythat some would resist the Rings far longer than most ofthe Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about
Bilbo.
‘Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used
it, so it might take a long while for the inﬂuence to wear off– before it was safe for him to see it again, for instance.Otherwise, he might live on for years, quite happily: just stopas he was when he parted with it. For he gave it up in theend of his own accord: an important point. No, I was nottroubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thinggo. It is for youthat I feel responsible.
‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about
you, and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits.It would be a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Powerovercame the Shire; if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers,Hornblowers, Bofﬁns, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not tomention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.’
Frodo shuddered. ‘But why should we be?’ he asked. ‘And
why should he want such slaves?’
‘To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that
hitherto – hitherto , mark you – he has entirely overlooked
the existence of hobbits. You should be thankful. But yoursafety has passed. He does not need you – he has manymore useful servants – but he won’t forget you again. Andhobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than
the shadow of the past 65
hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice and
revenge.’
‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t
understand what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and
our ring.’
‘It has everything to do with it,’ said Gandalf. ‘You do not
know the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it
myself when I was last here; but the time has come to speak.Give me the ring for a moment.’
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was
clasped to a chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened itand handed it slowly to the wizard. It felt suddenly veryheavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in some way reluc-
tant for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid
gold. ‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There are none. It is quite plain, and it
never shows a scratch or sign of wear.’
‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress
the wizard threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowingcorner of the ﬁre. Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs;but Gandalf held him back.
‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a
quick look from under his bristling brows.
No apparent change came over the ring. After a while
Gandalf got up, closed the shutters outside the window, anddrew the curtains. The room became dark and silent, thoughthe clack of Sam’s shears, now nearer to the windows, couldstill be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment thewizard stood looking at the ﬁre; then he stooped and removedthe ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked itup. Frodo gasped.
‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it
on his shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker andheavier than ever.
‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
66 the fellowship of the ring
As Frodo did so, he now saw ﬁne lines, ﬁner than the ﬁnest
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines
of ﬁre that seemed to form the letters of a ﬂowing script.They shone piercingly bright, and yet remote, as if out of agreat depth.
‘I cannot read the ﬁery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering
voice.
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an
ancient mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which Iwill not utter here. But this in the Common Tongue is whatis said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: ‘This is
the Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is theOne Ring that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening
the shadow of the past 67
of his power. He greatly desires it – but he must notget it.’
Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out
a vast hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming
up to engulf him. ‘This ring!’ he stammered. ‘How, how onearth did it come to me?’
‘Ah!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is a very long story. The begin-
nings lie back in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters
now remember. If I were to tell you all that tale, we shouldstill be sitting here when Spring had passed into Winter.
‘But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark
Lord. The rumours that you have heard are true: he hasindeed arisen again and left his hold in Mirkwood and
returned to his ancient fastness in the Dark Tower of Mordor.That name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow onthe borders of old stories. Always after a defeat and a respite,the Shadow takes another shape and grows again.’
‘I wish it need not have happened in my time,’ said Frodo.‘So do I,’ said Gandalf, ‘and so do all who live to see such
times. But that is not for them to decide. All we have todecide is what to do with the time that is given us. Andalready, Frodo, our time is beginning to look black. TheEnemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far fromripe, I think, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put toit. We should be very hard put to it, even if it were not forthis dreadful chance.
‘The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and
knowledge to beat down all resistance, break the last defences,and cover all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks theOne Ring.
‘The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and
his hand never touched them or sullied them. Seven theDwarf-kings possessed, but three he has recovered, and theothers the dragons have consumed. Nine he gave to MortalMen, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long agothey fell under the dominion of the One, and they becameRingwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his most
68 the fellowship of the ring
terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Nine
walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once
more, they too may walk again. But come! We will not speakof such things even in the morning of the Shire.
‘So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the
Seven also, or else they are destroyed. The Three are hiddenstill. But that no longer troubles him. He only needs the One;
for he made that Ring himself, it is his, and he let a great partof his own former power pass into it, so that he could rule allthe others. If he recovers it, then he will command them allagain, wherever they be, even the Three, and all that hasbeen wrought with them will be laid bare, and he will bestronger than ever.
‘And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that
the One had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as
should have been done. But he knows now that it has not
perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking it, seekingit, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope andour great fear.’
‘Why, why wasn’t it destroyed?’ cried Frodo. ‘And how
did the Enemy ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, andit was so precious to him?’ He clutched the Ring in his hand,as if he saw already dark ﬁngers stretching out to seize it.
‘It was taken from him,’ said Gandalf. ‘The strength of
the Elves to resist him was greater long ago; and not allMen were estranged from them. The Men of Westernessecame to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient historywhich it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow thentoo, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great deedsthat were not wholly vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell youall the tale, or you shall hear it told in full by one who knowsit best.
‘But for the moment, since most of all you need to know
how this thing came to you, and that will be tale enough, thisis all that I will say. It was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil ofWesternesse who overthrew Sauron, though they themselvesperished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil’s son cut the Ring
the shadow of the past 69
from Sauron’s hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron
was vanquished and his spirit ﬂed and was hidden for long
years, until his shadow took shape again in Mirkwood.
‘But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin,
and vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the eastbanks of the River, and near the Gladden Fields he waswaylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and almost all his folk
were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ring slippedfrom his ﬁnger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him andkilled him with arrows.’
Gandalf paused. ‘And there in the dark pools amid the
Gladden Fields,’ he said, ‘the Ring passed out of knowledgeand legend; and even so much of its history is known nowonly to a few, and the Council of the Wise could discover no
more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.
‘Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks
of the Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever-handedand quiet-footed little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for theyloved the River, and often swam in it, or made little boats ofreeds. There was among them a family of high repute, for itwas large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by agrandmother of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such asthey had. The most inquisitive and curious-minded of thatfamily was called Sme ´agol. He was interested in roots and
beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed undertrees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds;and he ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves ontrees, or the ﬂowers opening in the air: his head and his eyeswere downward.
‘He had a friend called De ´agol, of similar sort, sharper-
eyed but not so quick and strong. On a time they took a boatand went down to the Gladden Fields, where there were greatbeds of iris and ﬂowering reeds. There Sme ´agol got out and
went nosing about the banks but De ´agol sat in the boat and
ﬁshed. Suddenly a great ﬁsh took his hook, and before he
70 the fellowship of the ring
knew where he was, he was dragged out and down into the
water, to the bottom. Then he let go of his line, for he thought
he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holding hisbreath he grabbed at it.
‘Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and
a handful of mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold!when he washed the mud away, there in his hand lay a beauti-
ful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the sun, so thathis heart was glad. But Sme ´agol had been watching him from
behind a tree, and as De ´agol gloated over the ring, Sme ´agol
came softly up behind.
‘ ‘‘Give us that, De ´agol, my love,’’ said Sme ´agol, over his
friend’s shoulder.
‘ ‘‘Why?’’ said De ´agol.
‘ ‘‘Because it’s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,’’ said
Sme´agol.
‘ ‘‘I don’t care,’’ said De ´agol. ‘‘I have given you a present
already, more than I could afford. I found this, and I’m going
to keep it.’’
‘ ‘‘Oh, are you indeed, my love,’’ said Sme ´agol; and he
caught De ´agol by the throat and strangled him, because the
gold looked so bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring onhis ﬁnger.
‘No one ever found out what had become of De ´agol; he
was murdered far from home, and his body was cunninglyhidden. But Sme ´agol returned alone; and he found that none
of his family could see him, when he was wearing the ring.He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it;and he used it to ﬁnd out secrets, and he put his knowledgeto crooked and malicious uses. He became sharp-eyed andkeen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had given himpower according to his stature. It is not to be wondered atthat he became very unpopular and was shunned (when vis-ible) by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit theirfeet. He took to thieving, and going about muttering to him-self, and gurgling in his throat. So they called him Gollum ,
and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and his grand-
the shadow of the past 71
mother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and
turned him out of her hole.
‘He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hard-
ness of the world, and he journeyed up the River, till he came
to a stream that ﬂowed down from the mountains, and hewent that way. He caught ﬁsh in deep pools with invisibleﬁngers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as he
was bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of hishead, and a dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes.He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten about theSun. Then for the last time he looked up and shook his ﬁstat her.
‘But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far ahead the tops of
the Misty Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he
thought suddenly: ‘‘It would be cool and shady under thosemountains. The Sun could not watch me there. The roots ofthose mountains must be roots indeed; there must be greatsecrets buried there which have not been discovered sincethe beginning.’’
‘So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he
found a little cave out of which the dark stream ran; and hewormed his way like a maggot into the heart of the hills,and vanished out of all knowledge. The Ring went into theshadows with him, and even the maker, when his power hadbegun to grow again, could learn nothing of it.’
‘Gollum!’ cried Frodo. ‘Gollum? Do you mean that this is
the very Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!’
‘I think it is a sad story,’ said the wizard, ‘and it might have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.’
‘I can’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits,
however distantly,’ said Frodo with some heat. ‘What anabominable notion!’
‘It is true all the same,’ replied Gandalf. ‘About their
origins, at any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves.And even Bilbo’s story suggests the kinship. There was agreat deal in the background of their minds and memories
72 the fellowship of the ring
that was very similar. They understood one another remark-
ably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand,
say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, or even an Elf. Think of the riddlesthey both knew, for one thing.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘Though other folks besides hobbits ask
riddles, and of much the same sort. And hobbits don’t cheat.Gollum meant to cheat all the time. He was just trying to
put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay it amused hiswickedness to start a game which might end in providing himwith an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.’
‘Only too true, I fear,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there was some-
thing else in it, I think, which you don’t see yet. Even Gollumwas not wholly ruined. He had proved tougher than even oneof the Wise would have guessed – as a hobbit might. There
was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and lightcame through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out ofthe past. It was actually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindlyvoice again, bringing up memories of wind, and trees, andsun on the grass, and such forgotten things.
‘But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him
angrier in the end – unless it could be conquered. Unless itcould be cured.’ Gandalf sighed. ‘Alas! there is little hope ofthat for him. Yet not no hope. No, not though he possessedthe Ring so long, almost as far back as he can remember. Forit was long since he had worn it much: in the black darknessit was seldom needed. Certainly he had never ‘‘faded’’. He isthin and tough still. But the thing was eating up his mind, ofcourse, and the torment had become almost unbearable.
‘All the ‘‘great secrets’’ under the mountains had turned
out to be just empty night: there was nothing more to ﬁnd out,nothing worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentfulremembering. He was altogether wretched. He hated thedark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and theRing most of all.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo. ‘Surely the Ring was his
Precious and the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it,why didn’t he get rid of it, or go away and leave it?’
the shadow of the past 73
‘You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you
have heard,’ said Gandalf. ‘He hated it and loved it, as he
hated and loved himself. He could not get rid of it. He hadno will left in the matter.
‘A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. Itmay slip off
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most heplays with the idea of handing it on to someone else’s care –
and that only at an early stage, when it ﬁrst begins to grip.But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever gonebeyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my help,too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or castit aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself thatdecided things. The Ring left him.’
‘What, just in time to meet Bilbo?’ said Frodo. ‘Wouldn’t
an Orc have suited it better?’
‘It is no laughing matter,’ said Gandalf. ‘Not for you. It
was the strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so
far: Bilbo’s arrival just at that time, and putting his hand onit, blindly, in the dark.
‘There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The
Ring was trying to get back to its master. It had slipped fromIsildur’s hand and betrayed him; then when a chance cameit caught poor De ´agol, and he was murdered; and after that
Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no furtheruse of him: he was too small and mean; and as long as itstayed with him he would never leave his deep pool again.So now, when its master was awake once more and sendingout his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum.Only to be picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable:Bilbo from the Shire!
‘Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any
design of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than bysaying that Bilbo was meant to ﬁnd the Ring, and notby its
maker. In which case you also were meant to have it. And
that may be an encouraging thought.’
‘It is not,’ said Frodo. ‘Though I am not sure that I under-
stand you. But how have you learned all this about the Ring,
74 the fellowship of the ring
and about Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you just
guessing still?’
Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. ‘I knew
much and I have learned much,’ he answered. ‘But I am not
going to give an account of all my doings to you. The history
of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known to all theWise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the ﬁre-
writing alone, apart from any other evidence.’
‘And when did you discover that?’ asked Frodo, inter-
rupting.
‘Just now in this room, of course,’ answered the wizard
sharply. ‘But I expected to ﬁnd it. I have come back fromdark journeys and long search to make that ﬁnal test. It is thelast proof, and all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum’s
part, and ﬁtting it into the gap in the history, required somethought. I may have started with guesses about Gollum, butI am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.’
‘You have seen Gollum?’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement.‘Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I
tried long ago; but I have managed it at last.’
‘Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do
you know that?’
‘Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was
willing to tell – though not, of course, in the way I havereported it. Gollum is a liar, and you have to sift his words.For instance, he called the Ring his ‘‘birthday-present’’, andhe stuck to that. He said it came from his grandmother, whohad lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous story. Ihave no doubt that Sme ´agol’s grandmother was a matriarch,
a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing manyElven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it wasa lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.
‘The murder of De ´agol haunted Gollum, and he had made
up a defence, repeating it to his ‘‘Precious’’ over and overagain, as he gnawed bones in the dark, until he almostbelieved it. It washis birthday. De ´agol ought to have given
the ring to him. It had obviously turned up just so as to be
the shadow of the past 75
a present. It washis birthday-present, and so on, and on.
‘I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desper-
ately important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the
fear of ﬁre on him, and wrung the true story out of him, bit bybit, together with much snivelling and snarling. He thought hewas misunderstood and ill-used. But when he had at last toldme his history, as far as the end of the Riddle-game and
Bilbo’s escape, he would not say any more, except in darkhints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. Hemuttered that he was going to get his own back. People wouldsee if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a holeand then robbed . Gollum had good friends now, good friends
and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would payfor it. That was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed
his name. What is more, he knew where he came from.’
‘But how did he ﬁnd that out?’ asked Frodo.‘Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum
himself; and after that it would not be difﬁcult to discoverhis country, once Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out.His longing for the Ring proved stronger than his fear ofthe Orcs, or even of the light. After a year or two he left themountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, theRing was no longer devouring him; he began to revive a little.He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortallyhungry.
‘Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated,
and he always will, I think; but he was cunning. He found hecould hide from daylight and moonshine, and make his wayswiftly and softly by dead of night with his pale cold eyes,and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grewstronger and bolder with new food and new air. He foundhis way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.’
‘Is that where you found him?’ asked Frodo.‘I saw him there,’ answered Gandalf, ‘but before that he
had wandered far, following Bilbo’s trail. It was difﬁcult tolearn anything from him for certain, for his talk was con-stantly interrupted by curses and threats. ‘‘What had it got
76 the fellowship of the ring
in its pocketses?’’ he said. ‘‘It wouldn’t say, no precious. Little
cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated ﬁrst, it did. It broke the
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And wewill, precious!’’
‘That is a sample of his talk. I don’t suppose you want any
more. I had weary days of it. But from hints dropped amongthe snarls I gathered that his padding feet had taken him at
last to Esgaroth, and even to the streets of Dale, listeningsecretly and peering. Well, the news of the great events wentfar and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo’sname and knew where he came from. We had made no secretof our return journey to his home in the West. Gollum’ssharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’
‘Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo.
‘Why didn’t he come to the Shire?’
‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum
tried to. He set out and came back westward, as far as the
Great River. But then he turned aside. He was not dauntedby the distance, I am sure. No, something else drew himaway. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.
‘The Wood-elves tracked him ﬁrst, an easy task for them,
for his trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and backagain it led them, though they never caught him. The woodwas full of the rumour of him, dreadful tales even amongbeasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was somenew terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed treesto ﬁnd nests; it crept into holes to ﬁnd the young; it slippedthrough windows to ﬁnd cradles.
‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned
away. It wandered off southwards and passed out of theWood-elves’ ken, and was lost. And then I made a greatmistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the ﬁrst; though I fear it mayprove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I hadmuch else to think of at that time, and I still trusted the loreof Saruman.
‘Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many
dark and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I
the shadow of the past 77
took it up again, after Bilbo left here. And my search would
have been in vain, but for the help that I had from a friend:
Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age ofthe world. Together we sought for Gollum down the wholelength of Wilderland, without hope, and without success. Butat last, when I had given up the chase and turned to otherpaths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of great
perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept
and called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and
when we pressed him he whined and cringed, and rubbedhis long hands, licking his ﬁngers as if they pained him, as ifhe remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is nopossible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by
step, mile by mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.’
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart
beating. Even outside everything seemed still. No sound ofSam’s shears could now be heard.
‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all
wicked things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will togather them there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave itsmark, too, leave him open to the summons. And all folk werewhispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and itshatred of the West. There were his ﬁne new friends, whowould help him in his revenge!
‘Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too
much for his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked andpried on the borders he would be caught, and taken – forexamination. That was the way of it, I fear. When he wasfound he had already been there long, and was on his wayback. On some errand of mischief. But that does not mattermuch now. His worst mischief was done.
‘Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the
One has been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. Heknows where Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is aGreat Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that it is not one
78 the fellowship of the ring
of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine,
for they are accounted for. He knows that it is the One. Andhe has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the Shire .
‘The Shire – he may be seeking for it now, if he has not
already found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that hemay even think that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins has
become important.’
‘But this is terrible!’ cried Frodo. ‘Far worse than the worst
that I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf,
best of friends, what am I to do? For now I am really afraid.What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo did not stab thatvile creature, when he had a chance!’
‘Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy:
not to strike without need. And he has been well rewarded,
Frodo. Be sure that he took so little hurt from the evil, andescaped in the end, because he began his ownership of theRing so. With Pity.’
‘I am sorry,’ said Frodo. ‘But I am frightened; and I do not
feel any pity for Gollum.’
‘You have not seen him,’ Gandalf broke in.‘No, and I don’t want to,’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t understand
you. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have lethim live on after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate heis as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. He deserves death.’
‘Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve
death. And some that die deserve life. Can you give it tothem? Then do not be too eager to deal out death in judge-ment. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I have notmuch hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, butthere is a chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate ofthe Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play yet,for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pityof Bilbo may rule the fate of many – yours not least. In anycase we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched.The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him withsuch kindness as they can ﬁnd in their wise hearts.’
the shadow of the past 79
‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘even if Bilbo could not kill
Gollum, I wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never
found it, and that I had not got it! Why did you let me keepit? Why didn’t you make me throw it away, or, or destroy it?’
‘Let you? Make you?’ said the wizard. ‘Haven’t you been
listening to all that I have said? You are not thinking of whatyou are saying. But as for throwing it away, that was obviously
wrong. These Rings have a way of being found. In evil handsit might have done great evil. Worst of all, it might have falleninto the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would; forthis is the One, and he is exerting all his power to ﬁnd it ordraw it to himself.
‘Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and
that has troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake
that I had to take some risk – though even when I was faraway there has never been a day when the Shire has not beenguarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I didnot think that the Ring would have any lasting effect onyou, not for evil, not at any rate for a very long time. Andyou must remember that nine years ago, when I last saw you,I still knew little for certain.’
‘But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done
long ago?’ cried Frodo again. ‘If you had warned me, or evensent me a message, I would have done away with it.’
‘Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?’‘No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.’‘Try!’ said Gandalf. ‘Try now!’
Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at
it. It now appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device
that he could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, andFrodo thought how rich and beautiful was its colour, howperfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing andaltogether precious. When he took it out he had intended toﬂing it from him into the very hottest part of the ﬁre. But hefound now that he could not do so, not without a greatstruggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and
80 the fellowship of the ring
forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him;
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to
cast it away – but he found that he had put it back in hispocket.
Gandalf laughed grimly. ‘You see? Already you too, Frodo,
cannot easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not‘‘make’’ you – except by force, which would break your mind.
But as for breaking the Ring, force is useless. Even if youtook it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it wouldmake no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, orby mine.
‘Your small ﬁre, of course, would not melt even ordinary
gold. This Ring has already passed through it unscathed, andeven unheated. But there is no smith’s forge in this Shire that
could change it at all. Not even the anvils and furnaces of theDwarves could do that. It has been said that dragon-ﬁre couldmelt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not nowany dragon left on earth in which the old ﬁre is hot enough;nor was there ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black,who could have harmed the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, forthat was made by Sauron himself.
‘There is only one way: to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom in the
depths of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring inthere, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond thegrasp of the Enemy for ever.’
‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to
have it destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wishI had never seen the Ring! Why did it come to me? Whywas I chosen?’
‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You
may be sure that it was not for any merit that others do notpossess: not for power or wisdom, at any rate. But you havebeen chosen, and you must therefore use such strength andheart and wits as you have.’
‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise
and powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’
‘No!’ cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. ‘With that power
the shadow of the past 81
I should have power too great and terrible. And over me the
Ring would gain a power still greater and more deadly.’ His
eyes ﬂashed and his face was lit as by a ﬁre within. ‘Do nottempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lordhimself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pityfor weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do nottempt me! I dare not take it, not even to keep it safe, unused.
The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. Ishall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’
He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and
the shutters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room.Sam passed along the path outside whistling. ‘And now,’ saidthe wizard, turning back to Frodo, ‘the decision lies with you.But I will always help you.’ He laid his hand on Frodo’s
shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden, as long as it isyours to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemyis moving.’
There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and
puffed at his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemedclosed, but under the lids he was watching Frodo intently.Frodo gazed ﬁxedly at the red embers on the hearth, untilthey ﬁlled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking downinto profound wells of ﬁre. He was thinking of the fabledCracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last. ‘What are you thinking about?
Have you decided what to do?’
‘No!’ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of dark-
ness, and ﬁnding to his surprise that it was not dark, and thatout of the window he could see the sunlit garden. ‘Or perhaps,yes. As far as I understand what you have said, I suppose Imust keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the present,whatever it may do to me.’
‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you
keep it with that purpose,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so,’ said Frodo. ‘But I hope that you may ﬁnd some
other better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that
82 the fellowship of the ring
I am a danger, a danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep
the Ring and stay here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the
Shire, leave everything and go away.’ He sighed.
‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there
have been times when I thought the inhabitants too stupidand dull for words, and have felt that an earthquake or aninvasion of dragons might be good for them. But I don’t feel
like that now. I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind, safeand comfortable, I shall ﬁnd wandering more bearable: I shallknow that somewhere there is a ﬁrm foothold, even if my feetcannot stand there again.
‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but
I imagined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventureslike Bilbo’s or better, ending in peace. But this would mean
exile, a ﬂight from danger into danger, drawing it after me.And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and savethe Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well– desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.’
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great
desire to follow Bilbo ﬂamed up in his heart – to follow Bilbo,and even perhaps to ﬁnd him again. It was so strong that itovercame his fear: he could almost have run out there andthen down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done on asimilar morning long ago.
‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are
amazing creatures, as I have said before. You can learn allthat there is to know about their ways in a month, and yetafter a hundred years they can still surprise you at a pinch. Ihardly expected to get such an answer, not even from you.But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though helittle thought how important it would prove. I am afraid youare right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in theShire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as forothers, you will have to go, and leave the name of Bagginsbehind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside theShire or in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now.When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
the shadow of the past 83
‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of
anyone you can trust, and who would be willing to go by
your side – and that you would be willing to take intounknown perils. But if you look for a companion, be carefulin choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to yourclosest friends! The enemy has many spies and many waysof hearing.’
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware
that all was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to
one side of the window. Then with a dart he sprang to thesill, and thrust a long arm out and downwards. There was asquawk, and up came Sam Gamgee’s curly head hauled byone ear.
‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee
is it? Now what may you be doing?’
‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Nothing!
Leastways I was just trimming the grass-border under the
window, if you follow me.’ He picked up his shears andexhibited them as evidence.
‘I don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last
heard the sound of your shears. How long have you beeneavesdropping?’
‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your
pardon. There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’
‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you
listen?’ Gandalf’s eyes ﬂashed and his brows stuck out likebristles.
‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. ‘Don’t let him hurt
me, sir! Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! Myold dad would take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour,sir!’
‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from
laughing, although he was himself startled and rather puzzled.‘He knows, as well as I do, that you mean no harm. But justyou up and answer his questions straight away!’
‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that
I didn’t rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and
84 the fellowship of the ring
Mr. Bilbo, sir, and dragons, and a ﬁery mountain, and – and
Elves, sir. I listened because I couldn’t help myself, if you
know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do love tales ofthat sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say.Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn’t you take
me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘Come inside!’ he shouted, and
putting out both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears,
grass-clippings and all, right through the window and stoodhim on the ﬂoor. ‘Take you to see Elves, eh?’ he said, eyeingSam closely, but with a smile ﬂickering on his face. ‘So youheard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’
‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard
seemingly. I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so
upset.’
‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had sud-
denly realized that ﬂying from the Shire would mean morepainful partings than merely saying farewell to the familiarcomforts of Bag End. ‘I shall have to go. But’ – and here helooked hard at Sam – ‘if you really care about me, you willkeep that dead secret. See? If you don’t, if you even breathe
a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope Gandalf willturn you into a spotted toad and ﬁll the garden full of grass-snakes.’
Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said
Gandalf. ‘I have thought of something better than that. Some-thing to shut your mouth, and punish you properly for listen-ing. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!’
‘Me, sir!’ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a
walk. ‘Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!’ he shouted, andthen burst into tears.
Chapter3
THREE IS COMPANY
‘You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said
Gandalf. Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodomade no sign of getting ready to go.
‘I know. But it is difﬁcult to do both,’ he objected. ‘If I just
vanish like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.’
‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. ‘That
wouldn’t do at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think
of any way of slipping out of the Shire without its being
generally known, it will be worth a little delay. But you mustnot delay too long.’
‘What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?’ asked
Frodo. ‘I think I could probably make some arrangements bythen.’
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it
had come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable
residence than it had for years, and he wanted to savour asmuch as he could of his last summer in the Shire. Whenautumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart wouldthink more kindly of journeying, as it always did at thatseason. He had indeed privately made up his mind to leaveon his ﬁftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty-eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to setout and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in hismind, and the one thing that made the thought of leavingbearable. He thought as little as possible about the Ring, andwhere it might lead him in the end. But he did not tell all histhoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was alwaysdifﬁcult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Very well,’ he said. ‘I think
that will do – but it must not be any later. I am getting very
86 the fellowship of the ring
anxious. In the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out
any hint of where you are going! And see that Sam Gamgee
does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him into a toad.’
‘As for where I am going,’ said Frodo, ‘it would be difﬁcult
to give that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’
‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you
against leaving an address at the post-ofﬁce! But you are
leaving the Shire – and that should not be known, until youare far away. And you must go, or at least set out, eitherNorth, South, West or East – and the direction should cer-tainly not be known.’
‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag
End, and of saying farewell, that I have never even consideredthe direction,’ said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by
what shall I steer? What is to be my quest? Bilbo went to ﬁnda treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose one, and notreturn, as far as I can see.’
‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can
I. It may be your task to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom; but thatquest may be for others: I do not know. At any rate you arenot ready for that long road yet.’
‘No indeed!’ said Frodo. ‘But in the meantime what course
am I to take?’
‘Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’
answered the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make forRivendell. That journey should not prove too perilous,though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will growworse as the year fails.’
‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I
will make for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; hewill be delighted.’ He spoke lightly; but his heart was movedsuddenly with a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelven,and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of theFair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news
reached the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other
three is company 87
portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for more
important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed
he had already sold it – to the Sackville-Bagginses!
‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said
others, ‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s thebuyer.’ (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe butdisappointed age of 102.)
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even
more debatable than the price. A few held the theory – sup-
ported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – thatFrodo’s money was running out: he was going to leaveHobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the saledown in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. ‘As farfrom the Sackville-Bagginses as may be,’ some added. But so
ﬁrmly ﬁxed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth of theBagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard tobelieve, harder than any other reason or unreason that theirfancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yetunrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself veryquiet and did not go about by day, it was well known that hewas ‘hiding up in the Bag End’. But however a removal mightﬁt in with the designs of his wizardry, there was no doubtabout the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.
‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry
Brandybuck is looking out for a nice little hole for me, orperhaps a small house.’
As a matter of fact with Merry’s help he had already chosen
and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the countrybeyond Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he wasgoing to settle down there permanently. The decision to setout eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Bucklandwas on the eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had livedthere in childhood his going back would at least seemcredible.
Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one
evening, at the end of June, soon after Frodo’s plan had been
88 the fellowship of the ring
ﬁnally arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going
off again next morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he
said. ‘But I am going down beyond the southern borders toget some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.’
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked
rather worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked.
‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me
anxious and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after
all for you to get off at once, I shall come back immediately,or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick to your plan;but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Let meimpress on you once more: don’t use it! ’
He went off at dawn. ‘I may be back any day,’ he said. ‘At
the very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think
after all you may need my company on the Road.’
At ﬁrst Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered
often what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasinesswore off, and in the ﬁne weather he forgot his troubles for awhile. The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer, or sorich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey wasdripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry
about Gandalf again. September was passing and there wasstill no news of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drewnearer, and still he did not come, or send word. Bag Endbegan to be busy. Some of Frodo’s friends came to stay andhelp him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger andFolco Bofﬁn, and of course his special friends Pippin Tookand Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the wholeplace upside-down.
On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to
Buckland, conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo hadnot sold to his new home, by way of the BrandywineBridge.The next day Frodo became really anxious, and kepta constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthdaymorning, dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago forBilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the
three is company 89
evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just
a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled
and felt in no mood for it. The thought that he would sosoon have to part with his young friends weighed on his heart.He wondered how he would break it to them.
The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits,
and the party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf’s
absence. The dining-room was bare except for a table andchairs, but the food was good, and there was good wine:Frodo’s wine had not been included in the sale to theSackville-Bagginses.
‘Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s
get their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good homefor this!’ said Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last
drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of many
things they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday,and they drank his health and Frodo’s together according toFrodo’s custom. Then they went out for a sniff of air, andglimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo’s partywas over, and Gandalf had not come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart
with the remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this,and drove off with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). ‘Someonemust get there and warm the house before you arrive,’ said
Merry. ‘Well, see you later – the day after tomorrow, if you
don’t go to sleep on the way!’
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind.
Frodo was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a soundof Gandalf. He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, ifGandalf wanted him urgently, he would go to Crickhollow,and might even get there ﬁrst. For Frodo was going on foot.His plan – for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much asany other reason – was to walk from Hobbiton to BuckleburyFerry, taking it fairly easy.
‘I shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking
90 the fellowship of the ring
at himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had
not done any strenuous walking for a long time, and the
reﬂection looked rather ﬂabby, he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her
sandy-haired son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo’s annoy-ance. ‘Ours at last!’ said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It wasnot polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of Bag End did not
take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be for-given: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven yearslonger for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was now ahundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothingshe had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted thekeys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought acomplete inventory with her and went right through it. In the
end she departed with Lotho and the spare key and thepromise that the other key would be left at the Gamgees’ inBagshot Row. She snorted, and showed plainly that shethought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole duringthe night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the
kitchen. It had been ofﬁcially announced that Sam wascoming to Buckland ‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after hisbit of garden’; an arrangement that was approved by theGaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect ofhaving Lobelia as a neighbour.
‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his
chair. They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Samstrapped up their three packs and piled them in the porch.Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden. Sam dis-appeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and
dishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, andsaw the light of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadowscreep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark indoors. Hewent out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of thepath, and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half
three is company 91
expected to see Gandalf come striding up through the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s
going to be a ﬁne night,’ he said aloud. ‘That’s good for a
beginning. I feel like walking. I can’t bear any more hangingabout. I am going to start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ Heturned to go back, and then stopped, for he heard voices, justround the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was
certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was strange, and some-how unpleasant. He could not make out what it said, but heheard the Gaffer’s answers, which were rather shrill. The oldman seemed put out.
‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and
my Sam went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, soldout and gone, I tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business,
or yours. Where to? That ain’t no secret. He’s moved toBucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is– a tidy way. I’ve never been so far myself; they’re queer folksin Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good night toyou!’
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered
vaguely why the fact that they did not come on up the Hillseemed a great relief. ‘I am sick of questions and curiosityabout my doings, I suppose,’ he thought. ‘What an inquisitivelot they all are!’ He had half a mind to go and ask the Gafferwho the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it,and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End.
Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not
there. Frodo stepped inside the dark door. ‘Sam!’ he called.‘Sam! Time!’
‘Coming, sir!’ came the answer from far within, followed
soon by Sam himself, wiping his mouth. He had been sayingfarewell to the beer-barrel in the cellar.
‘All aboard, Sam?’ said Frodo.‘Yes, sir. I’ll last for a bit now, sir.’Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key
to Sam. ‘Run down with this to your home, Sam!’ he said.‘Then cut along the Row and meet us as quick as you can at
92 the fellowship of the ring
the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are not going
through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes
prying.’ Sam ran off at full speed.
‘Well, now we’re off at last!’ said Frodo. They shouldered
their packs and took up their sticks, and walked round thecorner to the west side of Bag End. ‘Good-bye!’ said Frodo,looking at the dark blank windows. He waved his hand, and
then turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurriedafter Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over thelow place in the hedge at the bottom and took to the ﬁelds,passing into the darkness like a rustle in the grasses.
At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to
the gate opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and
adjusted the straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared,trotting quickly and breathing hard; his heavy pack washoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head atall shapeless felt bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom helooked very much like a dwarf.
‘I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,’ said
Frodo. ‘I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on theirbacks.’
‘I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,’
said Sam stoutly and untruthfully.
‘No you don’t, Sam!’ said Pippin. ‘It is good for him. He’s
got nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He’s beenslack lately, and he’ll feel the weight less when he’s walkedoff some of his own.’
‘Be kind to a poor old hobbit!’ laughed Frodo. ‘I shall be
as thin as a willow-wand, I’m sure, before I get to Buckland.But I was talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken morethan your share, Sam, and I shall look into it at our nextpacking.’ He picked up his stick again. ‘Well, we all likewalking in the dark,’ he said, ‘so let’s put some miles behindus before bed.’
For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then
leaving it they turned left and took quietly to the ﬁelds again.
three is company 93
They went in single ﬁle along hedgerows and the borders of
coppices, and night fell dark about them. In their dark cloaks
they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. Sincethey were all hobbits, and were trying to be silent, they madeno noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild thingsin the ﬁelds and woods hardly noticed their passing.
After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton,
by a narrow plank-bridge. The stream was there no more than
a winding black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. Amile or two further south they hastily crossed the great roadfrom the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in the Tooklandand bending south-eastwards they made for the Green HillCountry. As they began to climb its ﬁrst slopes they lookedback and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the
gentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the foldsof the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater beside itsgrey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind,peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand infarewell.
‘I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,’
he said quietly.
When they had walked for about three hours they rested.
The night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wispsof mist were creeping up the hill-sides from the streams anddeep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in a light windabove their heads, made a black net against the pale sky.They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then wenton again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went rollingup and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the roadto Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbedaway from the main road in the Water-valley, and woundover the skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody End, a wildcorner of the Eastfarthing.
After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track
between tall trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. Itwas very dark. At ﬁrst they talked, or hummed a tune softlytogether, being now far away from inquisitive ears. Then they
94 the fellowship of the ring
marched on in silence, and Pippin began to lag behind. At
last, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and
yawned.
‘I am so sleepy,’ he said, ‘that soon I shall fall down on
the road. Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearlymidnight.’
‘I thought you liked walking in the dark,’ said Frodo. ‘But
there is no great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day
after tomorrow; but that leaves us nearly two days more.We’ll halt at the ﬁrst likely spot.’
‘The wind’s in the West,’ said Sam. ‘If we get to the other
side of this hill, we shall ﬁnd a spot that is sheltered and snugenough, sir. There is a dry ﬁr-wood just ahead, if I rememberrightly.’ Sam knew the land well within twenty miles of
Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his geography.
Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of
ﬁr-wood. Leaving the road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of the trees, and gathered dead sticks andcones to make a ﬁre. Soon they had a merry crackle of ﬂameat the foot of a large ﬁr-tree and they sat round it for a while,until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the greattree’s roots, they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, andwere soon fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo fearedno danger yet, for they were still in the heart of the Shire. Afew creatures came and looked at them when the ﬁre haddied away. A fox passing through the wood on business ofhis own stopped several minutes and sniffed.
‘Hobbits!’ he thought. ‘Well, what next? I have heard of
strange doings in this land, but I have seldom heard of ahobbit sleeping out of doors under a tree. Three of them!There’s something mighty queer behind this.’ He was quiteright, but he never found out any more about it.
The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up ﬁrst,
and found that a tree-root had made a hole in his back, andthat his neck was stiff. ‘Walking for pleasure! Why didn’t Idrive?’ he thought, as he usually did at the beginning of an
three is company 95
expedition. ‘And all my beautiful feather beds are sold to the
Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.’
He stretched. ‘Wake up, hobbits!’ he cried. ‘It’s a beautifulmorning.’
‘What’s beautiful about it?’ said Pippin, peering over the
edge of his blanket with one eye. ‘Sam! Get breakfast readyfor half-past nine! Have you got the bath-water hot?’
Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. ‘No, sir, I haven’t,
sir!’ he said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him
over, and then walked off to the edge of the wood. Away
eastward the sun was rising red out of the mists that lay thickon the world. Touched with gold and red the autumn treesseemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow anddisappeared.
When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good ﬁre
going. ‘Water!’ shouted Pippin. ‘Where’s the water?’
‘I don’t keep water in my pockets,’ said Frodo.‘We thought you had gone to ﬁnd some,’ said Pippin, busy
setting out the food, and cups. ‘You had better go now.’
‘You can come too,’ said Frodo, ‘and bring all the water-
bottles.’ There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They ﬁlledtheir bottles and the small camping kettle at a little fall wherethe water fell a few feet over an outcrop of grey stone. It wasicy cold; and they spluttered and puffed as they bathed theirfaces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed
up again, it was after ten o’clock, and the day was beginningto turn ﬁne and hot. They went down the slope, and acrossthe stream where it dived under the road, and up the nextslope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and bythat time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gearalready seemed a heavy burden.
The day’s march promised to be warm and tiring work.
After some miles, however, the road ceased to roll up anddown: it climbed to the top of a steep bank in a weary
96 the fellowship of the ring
zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down for
the last time. In front of them they saw the lower lands dotted
with small clumps of trees that melted away in the distanceto a brown woodland haze. They were looking across theWoody End towards the Brandywine River. The road woundaway before them like a piece of string.
‘The road goes on for ever,’ said Pippin; ‘but I can’t with-
out a rest. It is high time for lunch.’ He sat down on the bank
at the side of the road and looked away east into the haze,beyond which lay the River, and the end of the Shire in whichhe had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round eyeswere wide open – for he was looking across lands he hadnever seen to a new horizon.
‘Do Elves live in those woods?’ he asked.
‘Not that I ever heard,’ said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He
too was gazing eastward along the road, as if he had neverseen it before. Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself,saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with weary feet,
Until it joins some larger way,
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
‘That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo’s rhyming,’ said Pippin.
‘Or is it one of your imitations? It does not sound altogetherencouraging.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It came to me then, as if I was
making it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly itreminds me very much of Bilbo in the last years, before hewent away. He used often to say there was only one Road;that it was like a great river: its springs were at every doorstep,and every path was its tributary. ‘‘It’s a dangerous business,
three is company 97
Frodo, going out of your door,’’ he used to say. ‘‘You step
into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there is no
knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realizethat this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, andthat if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountainor even further and to worse places?’’ He used to say that onthe path outside the front door at Bag End, especially after
he had been out for a long walk.’
‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at
least,’ said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followedhis example, putting their packs against the bank and theirlegs out into the road. After a rest they had a good lunch,and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon
was on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had
not met a soul on the road. This way was not much used,being hardly ﬁt for carts, and there was little trafﬁc to theWoody End. They had been jogging along again for an houror more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. Theywere now on level ground, and the road after much windinglay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with tall trees,outliers of the approaching woods.
‘I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road
behind,’ said Sam.
They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them
from seeing far. ‘I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,’said Frodo; but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it wasnot so, and a sudden desire to hide from the view of the ridercame over him.
‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but
I would rather not be seen on the road – by anyone. I amsick of my doings being noticed and discussed. And if it isGandalf,’ he added as an afterthought, ‘we can give him alittle surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let’s get outof sight!’
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little
98 the fellowship of the ring
hollow not far from the road. There they lay ﬂat. Frodo
hesitated for a second: curiosity or some other feeling was
struggling with his desire to hide. The sound of hoofs drewnearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of longgrass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then helifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the greatroots.
Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but
a full-sized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to
crouch in the saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak andhood, so that only his boots in the high stirrups showedbelow; his face was shadowed and invisible.
When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the
horse stopped. The riding ﬁgure sat quite still with its head
bowed, as if listening. From inside the hood came a noise asof someone snifﬁng to catch an elusive scent; the head turnedfrom side to side of the road.
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo,
and he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, andyet the desire to get it out of his pocket became so strong thathe began slowly to move his hand. He felt that he had onlyto slip it on, and then he would be safe. The advice of Gandalfseemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. ‘And I am still inthe Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched the chain onwhich it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and shookthe reins. The horse stepped forward, walking slowly at ﬁrst,and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the
rider, until he dwindled into the distance. He could not bequite sure, but it seemed to him that suddenly, before itpassed out of sight, the horse turned aside and went into thetrees on the right.
‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said
Frodo to himself, as he walked towards his companions.Pippin and Sam had remained ﬂat in the grass, and hadseen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and his strangebehaviour.
three is company 99
‘I can’t say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling
for me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to
discover me. I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in theShire before.’
‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’
said Pippin. ‘And what is he doing in this part of the world?’
‘There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the
Southfarthing they have had trouble with Big People, I
believe. But I have never heard of anything like this rider.I wonder where he comes from.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know
where he comes from. It’s from Hobbiton that this here blackrider comes, unless there’s more than one. And I know wherehe’s going to.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him
in astonishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’
‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I
got back to our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad,
he says to me: Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away
with Mr. Frodo this morning. There’s been a strange customerasking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he’s only just gone. I’vesent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. Heseemed mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left hisold home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite ashudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I
don’t know , says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and
black-like, and he stooped over me. I reckon it was one of the BigFolk from foreign parts. He spoke funny.
‘I couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting;
and I didn’t give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is gettingold, and more than a bit blind, and it must have been neardark when this fellow come up the Hill and found him takingthe air at the end of our Row. I hope he hasn’t done no harm,sir, nor me.’
‘The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a
matter of fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemedto be inquiring for me, and I nearly went and asked him who
100 the fellowship of the ring
it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about it before. I
might have been more careful on the road.’
‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and
the Gaffer’s stranger,’ said Pippin. ‘We left Hobbiton secretly
enough, and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’
‘What about the smelling , sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer
said he was a black chap.’
‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But
perhaps it would only have made matters worse.’
‘Then you know or guess something about this rider?’ said
Pippin, who had caught the muttered words.
‘I don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo.
‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the
present, if you want to be mysterious. In the meanwhile what
are we to do? I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow Ithink we had better move on from here. Your talk of snifﬁngriders with invisible noses has unsettled me.’
‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not
on the road – in case that rider comes back, or another followshim. We ought to do a good step more today. Buckland isstill miles away.’
The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass,
as they started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw tothe left of the road, and kept out of sight of it as much asthey could. But this hindered them; for the grass was thick
and tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the trees began to
draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs,
and evening was coming on before they came back to theroad at the end of the long level over which it had run straightfor some miles. At that point it bent left and went down intothe lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lanebranched right, winding through a wood of ancient oak-treeson its way to Woodhall. ‘That is the way for us,’ said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk
of a tree: it was still alive and had leaves on the small branches
three is company 101
that it had put out round the broken stumps of its long-fallen
limbs; but it was hollow, and could be entered by a great
crack on the side away from the road. The hobbits creptinside, and sat there upon a ﬂoor of old leaves and decayedwood. They rested and had a light meal, talking quietly andlistening from time to time.
Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane.
The West wind was sighing in the branches. Leaves were
whispering. Soon the road began to fall gently but steadilyinto the dusk. A star came out above the trees in the darkeningEast before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep uptheir spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker andbrighter, the feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longerlistened for the sound of hoofs. They began to hum softly,
as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along, especiallywhen they are drawing near to home at night. With mosthobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbitshummed a walking-song (though not, of course, without anymention of supper and bed). Bilbo Baggins had made thewords, to a tune that was as old as the hills, and taught it toFrodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water-valley andtalked about Adventure.
Upon the hearth the ﬁre is red,Beneath the roof there is a bed;But not yet weary are our feet,
Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stoneThat none have seen but we alone.
Tree and ﬂower and leaf and grass,Let them pass! Let them pass!Hill and water under sky,Pass them by! Pass them by!
Still round the corner there may waitA new road or a secret gate,And though we pass them by today,
102 the fellowship of the ring
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,Let them go! Let them go!Sand and stone and pool and dell,Fare you well! Fare you well!
Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to treadThrough shadows to the edge of night,Until the stars are all alight.Then world behind and home ahead,We’ll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. ‘And nowto bed! And nowto bed!’ sang
Pippin in a high voice.
‘Hush!’ said Frodo. ‘I think I hear hoofs again.’They stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-
shadows, listening. There was a sound of hoofs in the lane,some way behind, but coming slow and clear down the wind.Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and ran into
the deeper shade under the oak-trees.
‘Don’t let us go too far!’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t want to be
seen, but I want to see if it is another Black Rider.’
‘Very well!’ said Pippin. ‘But don’t forget the snifﬁng!’
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to ﬁnd any
hiding-place better than the general darkness under the trees;Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree-bole, whileFrodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It showedgrey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Aboveit the stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw
three is company 103
something dark pass across the lighter space between two
trees, and then halt. It looked like the black shade of a horse
led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow stood closeto the point where they had left the path, and it swayed fromside to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snufﬂing.The shadow bent to the ground, and then began to crawltowards him.
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo;
but this time it was stronger than before. So strong that,
almost before he realized what he was doing, his hand wasgroping in his pocket. But at that moment there came a soundlike mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fellin the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up andretreated. It climbed on to the shadowy horse and seemed to
vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other side.Frodo breathed again.
‘Elves!’ exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. ‘Elves, sir!’ He
would have burst out of the trees and dashed off towards thevoices, if they had not pulled him back.
‘Yes, it is Elves,’ said Frodo. ‘One can meet them some-
times in the Woody End. They don’t live in the Shire, butthey wander into it in spring and autumn, out of their ownlands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am thankful that theydo! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just hereand was actually crawling towards us when the song began.As soon as he heard the voices he slipped away.’
‘What about the Elves?’ said Sam, too excited to trouble
about the rider. ‘Can’t we go and see them?’
‘Listen! They are coming this way,’ said Frodo. ‘We have
only to wait.’
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above
the others. It was singing in the fair elven-tongue, of whichFrodo knew only a little, and the others knew nothing. Yetthe sound blending with the melody seemed to shape itselfin their thought into words which they only partly under-stood. This was the song as Frodo heard it:
104 the fellowship of the ring
Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!
O Light to us that wander here
Amid the world of woven trees!
Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.
O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sown,
In windy ﬁelds now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The song ended. ‘These are High Elves! They spoke the
name of Elbereth!’ said Frodo in amazement. ‘Few of that
fairest folk are ever seen in the Shire. Not many now remainin Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. This is indeed astrange chance!’
The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the
Elves came down the lane towards the valley. They passedslowly, and the hobbits could see the starlight glimmering ontheir hair and in their eyes. They bore no lights, yet as theywalked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the rimof the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. Theywere now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned andlooked towards the hobbits and laughed.
‘Hail, Frodo!’ he cried. ‘You are abroad late. Or are you
perhaps lost?’ Then he called aloud to the others, and all thecompany stopped and gathered round.
‘This is indeed wonderful!’ they said. ‘Three hobbits in a
three is company 105
wood at night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo
went away. What is the meaning of it?’
‘The meaning of it, fair people,’ said Frodo, ‘is simply that
we seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walking
under the stars. But I would welcome your company.’
‘But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are
so dull,’ they laughed. ‘And how do you know that we go the
same way as you, for you do not know whither we are going?’
‘And how do you know my name?’ asked Frodo in return.‘We know many things,’ they said. ‘We have seen you
often before with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.’
‘Who are you, and who is your lord?’ asked Frodo.‘I am Gildor,’ answered their leader, the Elf who had ﬁrst
hailed him. ‘Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are
Exiles, and most of our kindred have long ago departed andwe too are now only tarrying here a while, ere we return overthe Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in peacein Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing?For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.’
‘O Wise People!’ interrupted Pippin eagerly. ‘Tell us about
the Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders?’ they said in low voices. ‘Why do you ask
about Black Riders?’
‘Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one
has done so twice,’ said Pippin; ‘only a little while ago heslipped away as you drew near.’
The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly
in their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits.‘We will not speak of this here,’ he said. ‘We think you hadbest come now with us. It is not our custom, but for this timewe will take you on our road, and you shall lodge with ustonight, if you will.’
‘O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,’ said
Pippin. Sam was speechless. ‘I thank you indeed, GildorInglorion,’ said Frodo bowing. ‘ Elen sı ´la lu´menn’ omentielvo ,
a star shines on the hour of our meeting,’ he added in theHigh-elven speech.
106 the fellowship of the ring
‘Be careful, friends!’ cried Gildor laughing. ‘Speak no
secrets! Here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was
a good master. Hail, Elf-friend!’ he said, bowing to Frodo.‘Come now with your friends and join our company! Youhad best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. Youmay be weary before we halt.’
‘Why? Where are you going?’ asked Frodo.
‘For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Wood-
hall. It is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it,and it will shorten your journey tomorrow.’
They now marched on again in silence, and passed like
shadows and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits)could walk when they wished without sound or footfall.Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered once or twice;
but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and savedhim from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo’s side, as if in adream, with an expression on his face half of fear and half ofastonished joy.
The woods on either side became denser; the trees were
now younger and thicker; and as the lane went lower, runningdown into a fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes ofhazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At last the Elvesturned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseenthrough the thickets on the right; and this they followed as itwound away back up the wooded slopes on to the top of
a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land
of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadowof the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass,grey under the night. On three sides the woods pressedupon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply and the topsof the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, werebelow their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and ﬂatunder the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in thevillage of Woodhall.
The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices;
they seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo
three is company 107
and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks and
blankets, and drowsiness stole over them. The night grew on,
and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep,pillowed on a green hillock.
Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars,
and slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like ajewel of ﬁre. Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn
away like a veil, and there leaned up, as he climbed over therim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagorwith his shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenlyunder the trees a ﬁre sprang up with a red light.
‘Come!’ the Elves called to the hobbits. ‘Come! Now is the
time for speech and merriment!’
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. ‘There is
a ﬁre in the hall, and food for hungry guests,’ said an Elf
standing before him.
At the south end of the greensward there was an opening.
There the green ﬂoor ran on into the wood, and formed awide space like a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Theirgreat trunks ran like pillars down each side. In the middlethere was a wood-ﬁre blazing, and upon the tree-pillarstorches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily.The Elves sat round the ﬁre upon the grass or upon the sawnrings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups andpouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates anddishes.
‘This is poor fare,’ they said to the hobbits; ‘for we are
lodging in the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you areour guests at home, we will treat you better.’
‘It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,’ said
Frodo.
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for
his mind was ﬁlled with the light upon the elf-faces, and thesound of voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in awaking dream. But he remembered that there was bread,surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who is starv-ing; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended
108 the fellowship of the ring
fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was ﬁlled with a
fragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer
afternoon.
Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to
himself, what he felt or thought that night, though it remainedin his memory as one of the chief events of his life. Thenearest he ever got was to say: ‘Well, sir, if I could grow
apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But it wasthe singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.’
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but
his mind was chieﬂy on the words spoken. He knew a littleof the elf-speech and listened eagerly. Now and again hespoke to those that served him and thanked them in theirown language. They smiled at him and said laughing: ‘Here
is a jewel among hobbits!’
After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and
borne away to a bower under the trees; there he was laidupon a soft bed and slept the rest of the night away. Samrefused to leave his master. When Pippin had gone, he cameand sat curled up at Frodo’s feet, where at last he noddedand closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking withGildor.
They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo ques-
tioned Gildor much about happenings in the wide worldoutside the Shire. The tidings were mostly sad and ominous:
of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the ﬂight of the
Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest tohis heart:
‘Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?’Gildor smiled. ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘Twice. He said farewell
to us on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far fromhere.’ He would say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fellsilent.
‘You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself,
Frodo,’ said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I canread more in your face and in the thought behind your ques-
three is company 109
tions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you doubt that you
will ﬁnd what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or
that you will ever return. Is not that so?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret
known only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He lookeddown at Sam, who was snoring gently.
‘The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,’ said Gildor.
‘The Enemy?’ said Frodo. ‘Then you know why I am
leaving the Shire?’
‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing
you,’ answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is – strangeindeed though that seems to me. And I warn you that perilis now both before you and behind you, and upon eitherside.’
‘You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of
the Enemy. What arethe Black Riders?’
‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’
‘Nothing about such creatures.’‘Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror
should keep you from your journey. For it seems to me thatyou have set out only just in time, if indeed you are in time.You must now make haste, and neither stay nor turn back;for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.’
‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrify-
ing than your hints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knewthat danger lay ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meetit in our own Shire. Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water tothe River in peace?’
‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt
here before hobbits were; and others will dwell here againwhen hobbits are no more. The wide world is all about you:you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for ever fenceit out.’
‘I know – and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar.
What can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly,and make my way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps aredogged, before ever I get to Buckland.’
110 the fellowship of the ring
‘I think you should still follow that plan,’ said Gildor. ‘I do
not think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But
if you desire clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I donot know the reason for your ﬂight, and therefore I do notknow by what means your pursuers will assail you. Thesethings Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see himbefore you leave the Shire?’
‘I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious.
I have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to
have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but hehas never appeared. Now I am wondering what can havehappened. Should I wait for him?’
Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’
he said at last. ‘That Gandalf should be late, does not bode
well. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for
they are subtle and quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go
or wait.’
‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘ Go not to the Elves
for counsel, for they will say both no and yes. ’
‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give un-
guarded advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from thewise to the wise, and all courses may run ill. But what wouldyou? You have not told me all concerning yourself; and howthen shall I choose better than you? But if you demand advice,I will for friendship’s sake give it. I think you should nowgo at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not comebefore you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you shouldbe grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elveshave their own labours and their own sorrows, and they arelittle concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any othercreatures upon earth. Our paths cross theirs seldom, bychance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more thanchance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to saytoo much.’
‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would
tell me plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice
three is company 111
I may not see Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know
what is the danger that pursues me.’
‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the
Enemy?’ answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to
them! They are deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heartforbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, willknow more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May
Elbereth protect you!’
‘But where shall I ﬁnd courage?’ asked Frodo. ‘That is
what I chieﬂy need.’
‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of
good hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; butwe will send our messages through the lands. The WanderingCompanies shall know of your journey, and those that have
power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldomhave we had such delight in strangers, and it is fair to hearwords of the Ancient Speech from the lips of other wanderersin the world.’
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor ﬁnished
speaking. ‘I will sleep now,’ he said; and the Elf led him to abower beside Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed andfell at once into a dreamless slumber.
Chapter4
A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a
bower made by a living tree with branches laced and droopingto the ground; his bed was of fern and grass, deep and soft
and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining through the
ﬂuttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. Hejumped up and went out.
Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood.
Pippin was standing studying the sky and weather. There
was no sign of the Elves.
‘They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,’ said Pippin.
‘Come and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost asgood as it did last night. I did not want to leave you any, butSam insisted.’
Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. ‘What is the
plan for today?’ asked Pippin.
‘To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,’ answered
Frodo, and gave his attention to the food.
‘Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?’ asked
Pippin cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of
seeing a whole troop of them did not seem very alarming tohim.
‘Yes, probably,’ said Frodo, not liking the reminder. ‘But
I hope to get across the river without their seeing us.’
‘Did you ﬁnd out anything about them from Gildor?’‘Not much – only hints and riddles,’ said Frodo evasively.‘Did you ask about the snifﬁng?’‘We didn’t discuss it,’ said Frodo with his mouth full.‘You should have. I am sure it is very important.’
‘In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain
it,’ said Frodo sharply. ‘And now leave me in peace for a bit!
a short cut to mushrooms 113
I don’t want to answer a string of questions while I am eating.
I want to think!’
‘Good heavens!’ said Pippin. ‘At breakfast?’ He walked
away towards the edge of the green.
From Frodo’s mind the bright morning – treacherously
bright, he thought – had not banished the fear of pursuit; and
he pondered the words of Gildor. The merry voice of Pippin
came to him. He was running on the green turf and singing.
‘No! I could not!’ he said to himself. ‘It is one thing to take
my young friends walking over the Shire with me, until weare hungry and weary, and food and bed are sweet. To takethem into exile, where hunger and weariness may have nocure, is quite another – even if they are willing to come. Theinheritance is mine alone. I don’t think I ought even to take
Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Samwas watching him.
‘Well, Sam!’ he said. ‘What about it? I am leaving the Shire
as soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind nownot even to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’
‘Very good, sir!’‘You still mean to come with me?’‘I do.’‘It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already danger-
ous. Most likely neither of us will come back.’
‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’
said Sam. ‘ Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him!
I said. I never mean to. I am going with him, if he climbs to the
Moon; and if any of those Black Riders try to stop him, they’llhave Sam Gamgee to reckon with , I said. They laughed.’
‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’
‘The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they
seemed to know you were going away, so I didn’t see the useof denying it. Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’
‘They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you
have had a closer view?’
‘They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’
answered Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think
114 the fellowship of the ring
about them. They are quite different from what I expected –
so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it were.’
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see
some outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have
come over him. It did not sound like the voice of the old SamGamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked like the oldSam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually
thoughtful.
‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that
your wish to see them has come true already?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night
I feel different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I knowwe are going to take a very long road, into darkness; butI know I can’t turn back. It isn’t to see Elves now, nor
dragons, nor mountains, that I want – I don’t rightly knowwhat I want: but I have something to do before the end, andit lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, ifyou understand me.’
‘I don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose
me a good companion. I am content. We will go together.’
Frodo ﬁnished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up
he looked over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.
‘All ready to start?’ he said as Pippin ran up. ‘We must be
getting off at once. We slept late; and there are a good manymiles to go.’
‘You slept late, you mean,’ said Pippin. ‘I was up long
before; and we are only waiting for you to ﬁnish eating andthinking.’
‘I have ﬁnished both now. And I am going to make for
Bucklebury Ferry as quickly as possible. I am not going outof the way, back to the road we left last night: I am going tocut straight across country from here.’
‘Then you are going to ﬂy,’ said Pippin. ‘You won’t cut
straight on foot anywhere in this country.’
‘We can cut straighter than the road anyway,’ answered
Frodo. ‘The Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard roadcurves away to the left – you can see a bend of it away north
a short cut to mushrooms 115
over there. It goes round the north end of the Marish so as
to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But that
is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of thedistance if we made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.’
‘Short cuts make long delays ,’ argued Pippin. ‘The country
is rough round here, and there are bogs and all kinds ofdifﬁculties down in the Marish – I know the land in these
parts. And if you are worrying about Black Riders, I can’tsee that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in awood or a ﬁeld.’
‘It is less easy to ﬁnd people in the woods and ﬁelds,’
answered Frodo. ‘And if you are supposed to be on the road,there is some chance that you will be looked for on the roadand not off it.’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘I will follow you into every bog
and ditch. But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden
Perch at Stock before sundown. The best beer in the East-
farthing, or used to be: it is a long time since I tasted it.’
‘That settles it!’ said Frodo. ‘Short cuts make delays, but
inns make longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away
from the Golden Perch . We want to get to Bucklebury before
dark. What do you say, Sam?’
‘I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam (in spite
of private misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer inthe Eastfarthing).
‘Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let’s
go now!’ said Pippin.
It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before;
but clouds were beginning to come up from the West. Itlooked likely to turn to rain. The hobbits scrambled down asteep green bank and plunged into the thick trees below.Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left,and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered alongthe eastern side of the hills, until they reached the ﬂatsbeyond. Then they could make straight for the Ferry overcountry that was open, except for a few ditches and fences.
116 the fellowship of the ring
Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled
than it had appeared. There were no paths in the under-
growth, and they did not get on very fast. When they hadstruggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a streamrunning down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed withsteep slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most incon-
veniently it cut across the line they had chosen. They couldnot jump over it, nor indeed get across it at all without gettingwet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering what todo. ‘First check!’ said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the
trees he caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank fromwhich they had climbed down.
‘Look!’ he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all
looked, and on the edge high above them they saw against
the sky a horse standing. Beside it stooped a black ﬁgure.
They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led
the way, and plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside thestream. ‘Whew!’ he said to Pippin. ‘We were both right! Theshort cut has gone crooked already; but we got under coveronly just in time. You’ve got sharp ears, Sam: can you hearanything coming?’
They stood still, almost holding their breath as they
listened; but there was no sound of pursuit. ‘I don’t fancyhe would try bringing his horse down that bank,’ said Sam.‘But I guess he knows we came down it. We had better begoing on.’
Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry,
and the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let themthrough. They were cut off from the wind by the ridgebehind, and the air was still and stuffy. When they forcedtheir way at last into more open ground, they were hot andtired and very scratched, and they were also no longer certainof the direction in which they were going. The banks of thestream sank, as it reached the levels and became broader andshallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River.
a short cut to mushrooms 117
‘Why, this is the Stock-brook!’ said Pippin. ‘If we are going
to try and get back on to our course, we must cross at once
and bear right.’
They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open
space, rush-grown and treeless, on the further side. Beyondthat they came again to a belt of trees: tall oaks, for the mostpart, with here and there an elm tree or an ash. The ground
was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but thetrees were too close for them to see far ahead. The leavesblew upwards in sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rainbegan to fall from the overcast sky. Then the wind died awayand the rain came streaming down. They trudged along asfast as they could, over patches of grass, and through thickdrifts of old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and
trickled. They did not talk, but kept glancing back, and fromside to side.
After half an hour Pippin said: ‘I hope we have not turned
too much towards the south, and are not walking longwisethrough this wood! It is not a very broad belt – I should havesaid no more than a mile at the widest – and we ought tohave been through it by now.’
‘It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,’ said Frodo.
‘That won’t mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going!I am not sure that I want to come out into the open yet.’
They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then
the sun gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rainlessened. It was now past mid-day, and they felt it was hightime for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its leavesthough fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground atits feet was fairly dry and sheltered. When they came to maketheir meal, they found that the Elves had ﬁlled their bottleswith a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent ofa honey made of many ﬂowers, and was wonderfully refresh-ing. Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their ﬁngersat rain, and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt,would soon be behind them.
118 the fellowship of the ring
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed
his eyes. Sam and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum,
and then to sing softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I goTo heal my heart and drown my woe.Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,But under a tall tree I will lie,And let the clouds go sailing by.
Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short
suddenly. Frodo sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came
down the wind, like the cry of some evil and lonely creature.It rose and fell, and ended on a high piercing note. Even asthey sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was answered byanother cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to theblood. There was then a silence, broken only by the soundof the wind in the leaves.
‘And what do you think that was?’ Pippin asked at last,
trying to speak lightly, but quavering a little. ‘If it was a bird,it was one that I never heard in the Shire before.’
‘It was not bird or beast,’ said Frodo. ‘It was a call, or a
signal – there were words in that cry, though I could notcatch them. But no hobbit has such a voice.’
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the
Riders, but no one spoke of them. They were now reluctanteither to stay or go on; but sooner or later they had got to getacross the open country to the Ferry, and it was best to gosooner and in daylight. In a few moments they had shoul-dered their packs again and were off.
Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-
lands stretched before them. They now saw that they had, infact, turned too much to the south. Away over the ﬂats theycould glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury across the River,but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from the
a short cut to mushrooms 119
edge of the trees, they set off across the open as quickly as
they could.
At ﬁrst they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood.
Far back behind them stood the high place where they had
breakfasted. Frodo half expected to see the small distantﬁgure of a horseman on the ridge dark against the sky; butthere was no sign of one. The sun escaping from the breaking
clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was nowshining brightly again. Their fear left them, though they stillfelt uneasy. But the land became steadily more tame andwell-ordered. Soon they came into well-tended ﬁelds andmeadows: there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage.Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinarycorner of the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The
line of the River grew nearer; and the Black Riders began toseem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind.
They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-ﬁeld, and
came to a stout gate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between lowwell-laid hedges towards a distant clump of trees. Pippinstopped.
‘I know these ﬁelds and this gate!’ he said. ‘This is Bam-
furlong, old Farmer Maggot’s land. That’s his farm awaythere in the trees.’
‘One trouble after another!’ said Frodo, looking nearly as
much alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was theslot leading to a dragon’s den. The others looked at him insurprise.
‘What’s wrong with old Maggot?’ asked Pippin. ‘He’s a
good friend to all the Brandybucks. Of course he’s a terrorto trespassers, and keeps ferocious dogs – but after all, folkdown here are near the border and have to be more on theirguard.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘But all the same,’ he added with a
shamefaced laugh, ‘I am terriﬁed of him and his dogs. I haveavoided his farm for years and years. He caught me severaltimes trespassing after mushrooms, when I was a youngsterat Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and then
120 the fellowship of the ring
took me and showed me to his dogs. ‘‘See, lads,’’ he said,
‘‘next time this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can
eat him. Now see him off!’’ They chased me all the way tothe Ferry. I have never got over the fright – though I daresaythe beasts knew their business and would not really havetouched me.’
Pippin laughed. ‘Well, it’s time you made it up. Especially
if you are coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is
really a stout fellow – if you leave his mushrooms alone. Let’sget into the lane and then we shan’t be trespassing. If wemeet him, I’ll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry’s, and Iused to come here with him a good deal at one time.’
They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs
of a large house and farm-buildings peeping out among the
trees ahead. The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, andmost of the inhabitants of the Marish, were house-dwellers;and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wallall round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out ofthe wall into the lane.
Suddenly as they drew nearer a terriﬁc baying and barking
broke out, and a loud voice was heard shouting: ‘Grip! Fang!Wolf! Come on, lads!’
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few
paces. The gate opened and three huge dogs came peltingout into the lane, and dashed towards the travellers, barkingﬁercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but Sam shrankagainst the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed athim suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest andmost ferocious of the three halted in front of Frodo, bristlingand growling.
Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set
hobbit with a round red face. ‘Hallo! Hallo! And who mayyou be, and what may you be wanting?’ he asked.
‘Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!’ said Pippin.The farmer looked at him closely. ‘Well, if it isn’t Master
Pippin – Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!’ he cried, changing
a short cut to mushrooms 121
from a scowl to a grin. ‘It’s a long time since I saw you round
here. It’s lucky for you that I know you. I was just going out
to set my dogs on any strangers. There are some funny thingsgoing on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wanderingin these parts at times. Too near the River,’ he said, shakinghis head. ‘But this fellow was the most outlandish I have everset eyes on. He won’t cross my land without leave a second
time, not if I can stop it.’
‘What fellow do you mean?’ asked Pippin.‘Then you haven’t seen him?’ said the farmer. ‘He went
up the lane towards the causeway not a long while back. Hewas a funny customer and asking funny questions. But per-haps you’ll come along inside, and we’ll pass the news morecomfortable. I’ve a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your
friends are willing, Mr. Took.’
It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if
allowed to do it in his own time and fashion, so they allaccepted the invitation. ‘What about the dogs?’ asked Frodoanxiously.
The farmer laughed. ‘They won’t harm you – not unless I
tell ’em to. Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!’ he cried. ‘Heel, Wolf!’To the relief of Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away andlet them go free.
Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. ‘Mr. Frodo
Baggins,’ he said. ‘You may not remember him, but he usedto live at Brandy Hall.’ At the name Baggins the farmerstarted, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment Frodothought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had beenaroused, and that the dogs would be told to see him off. ButFarmer Maggot took him by the arm.
‘Well, if that isn’t queerer than ever!’ he exclaimed. ‘Mr.
Baggins is it? Come inside! We must have a talk.’
They went into the farmer’s kitchen, and sat by the wide
ﬁre-place. Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, andﬁlled four large mugs. It was a good brew, and Pippin foundhimself more than compensated for missing the Golden Perch .
Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural mistrust
122 the fellowship of the ring
of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was
not disposed to be quick friends with anyone who had beaten
his master, however long ago.
After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural
prospects (which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggotput down his mug and looked at them all in turn.
‘Now, Mr. Peregrin,’ he said, ‘where might you be coming
from, and where might you be going to? Were you coming
to visit me? For, if so, you had gone past my gate withoutmy seeing you.’
‘Well, no,’ answered Pippin. ‘To tell you the truth, since
you have guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end:we had come over your ﬁelds. But that was quite by accident.We lost our way in the woods, back near Woodhall, trying to
take a short cut to the Ferry.’
‘If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you
better,’ said the farmer. ‘But I wasn’t worrying about that.You have leave to walk over my land, if you have a mind,Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins – though I daresay youstill like mushrooms.’ He laughed. ‘Ah yes, I recognized thename. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins wasone of the worst young rascals of Buckland. But it wasn’tmushrooms I was thinking of. I had just heard the nameBaggins before you turned up. What do you think that funnycustomer asked me?’
They waited anxiously for him to go on. ‘Well,’ the farmer
continued, approaching his point with slow relish, ‘he cameriding on a big black horse in at the gate, which happened tobe open, and right up to my door. All black he was himself,too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want to beknown. ‘‘Now what in the Shire can he want?’’ I thought tomyself. We don’t see many of the Big Folk over the border;and anyway I had never heard of any like this black fellow.
‘ ‘‘Good-day to you!’’ I says, going out to him. ‘‘This lane
don’t lead anywhere, and wherever you may be going, yourquickest way will be back to the road.’’ I didn’t like the looksof him; and when Grip came out, he took one sniff and let
a short cut to mushrooms 123
out a yelp as if he had been stung: he put down his tail and
bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still.
‘ ‘‘I come from yonder,’’ he said, slow and stiff-like,
pointing back west, over myﬁelds, if you please. ‘‘Have you
seen Baggins ?’’ he asked in a queer voice, and bent down
towards me. I could not see any face, for his hood fell down
so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold.
‘ ‘‘Be off!’’ I said. ‘‘There are no Bagginses here. You’re in
the wrong part of the Shire. You had better go back west toHobbiton – but you can go by road this time.’’
‘ ‘‘Baggins has left,’’ he answered in a whisper. ‘‘He is
coming. He is not far away. I wish to ﬁnd him. If he passeswill you tell me? I will come back with gold.’’
‘ ‘‘No you won’t,’’ I said. ‘‘You’ll go back where you
belong, double quick. I give you one minute before I call all
my dogs.’’
‘He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and
it might not. Then he spurred his great horse right at me,and I jumped out of the way only just in time. I called thedogs, but he swung off, and rode through the gate and upthe lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. Whatdo you think of that?’
Frodo sat for a moment looking at the ﬁre, but his only
thought was how on earth would they reach the Ferry. ‘Idon’t know what to think,’ he said at last.
‘Then I’ll tell you what to think,’ said Maggot. ‘You should
never have gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr.Frodo. Folk are queer up there.’ Sam stirred in his chair, andlooked at the farmer with an unfriendly eye. ‘But you werealways a reckless lad. When I heard you had left the Brandy-bucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you weregoing to ﬁnd trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of thosestrange doings of Mr. Bilbo’s. His money was got in somestrange fashion in foreign parts, they say. Maybe there issome that want to know what has become of the gold andjewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?’
124 the fellowship of the ring
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were
rather disconcerting.
‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ Maggot went on, ‘I’m glad that you’ve
had the sense to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay
there! And don’t get mixed up with these outlandish folk.You’ll have friends in these parts. If any of these black fellowscome after you again, I’ll deal with them. I’ll say you’re dead,
or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that mightbe true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they wantnews of.’
‘Maybe you’re right,’ said Frodo, avoiding the farmer’s eye
and staring at the ﬁre.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. ‘Well, I see you have
ideas of your own,’ he said. ‘It is as plain as my nose that no
accident brought you and that rider here on the same after-noon; and maybe my news was no great news to you, afterall. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mindto keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind of trouble.Perhaps you are thinking it won’t be too easy to get to theFerry without being caught?’
‘I was thinking so,’ said Frodo. ‘But we have got to try and
get there; and it won’t be done by sitting and thinking. So Iam afraid we must be going. Thank you very much indeedfor your kindness! I’ve been in terror of you and your dogsfor over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laughto hear it. It’s a pity: for I’ve missed a good friend. And nowI’m sorry to leave so soon. But I’ll come back, perhaps, oneday – if I get a chance.’
‘You’ll be welcome when you come,’ said Maggot. ‘But
now I’ve a notion. It’s near sundown already, and we aregoing to have our supper; for we mostly go to bed soon afterthe Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could stay and havea bite with us, we would be pleased!’
‘And so should we!’ said Frodo. ‘But we must be going at
once, I’m afraid. Even now it will be dark before we canreach the Ferry.’
‘Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of
a short cut to mushrooms 125
supper, I’ll get out a small waggon, and I’ll drive you all to
the Ferry. That will save you a good step, and it might also
save you trouble of another sort.’
Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief
of Pippin and Sam. The sun was already behind the westernhills, and the light was failing. Two of Maggot’s sons and histhree daughters came in, and a generous supper was laid on
the large table. The kitchen was lit with candles and the ﬁrewas mended. Mrs. Maggot bustled in and out. One or twoother hobbits belonging to the farm-household came in. In ashort while fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer inplenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besidesmuch other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the ﬁreand gnawed rinds and cracked bones.
When they had ﬁnished, the farmer and his sons went out
with a lantern and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the
yard, when the guests came out. They threw their packs onboard and climbed in. The farmer sat in the driving-seat, andwhipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the lightof the open door.
‘You be careful of yourself, Maggot!’ she called. ‘Don’t go
arguing with any foreigners, and come straight back!’
‘I will!’ said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now
no breath of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, anda chill was in the air. They went without lights and took itslowly. After a mile or two the lane came to an end, crossinga deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to the high-banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north
and south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, andthere was not a sound in the still air. Thin strands of river-mistwere hanging above the dikes, and crawling over the ﬁelds.
‘It’s going to be thick,’ said Maggot; ‘but I’ll not light my
lanterns till I turn for home. We’ll hear anything on the roadlong before we meet it tonight.’
***
126 the fellowship of the ring
It was ﬁve miles or more from Maggot’s lane to the Ferry.
The hobbits wrapped themselves up, but their ears were
strained for any sound above the creak of the wheels and theslow clopof the ponies’ hoofs. The waggon seemed slower
than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was noddingtowards sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the risingfog.
They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was
marked by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on
their right. Farmer Maggot drew in his ponies and the waggoncreaked to a halt. They were just beginning to scramble out,when suddenly they heard what they had all been dreading:hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towardsthem.
Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies’ heads,
and peering forward into the gloom. Clip-clop ,clip-clop came
the approaching rider. The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in
the still, foggy air.
‘You’d better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously.
‘You get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets,and we’ll send this rider to the rightabouts!’ He climbed outand went to the farmer’s side. Black Riders would have toride over him to get near the waggon.
Clop-clop, clop-clop . The rider was nearly on them.
‘Hallo there!’ called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs
stopped short. They thought they could dimly guess a darkcloaked shape in the mist, a yard or two ahead.
‘Now then!’ said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and
striding forward. ‘Don’t you come a step nearer! What doyou want, and where are you going?’
‘I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?’ said a mufﬂed
voice – but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. Adark lantern was uncovered, and its light fell on the astonishedface of the farmer.
‘Mr. Merry!’ he cried.‘Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?’ said Merry
coming forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears
a short cut to mushrooms 127
subsided, he seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit-
size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was swathed round
his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog.
Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. ‘So there
you are at last!’ said Merry. ‘I was beginning to wonder ifyou would turn up at all today, and I was just going back tosupper. When it grew foggy I came across and rode up
towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But I’mblest if I know which way you have come. Where did youﬁnd them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-pond?’
‘No, I caught ’em trespassing,’ said the farmer, ‘and nearly
set my dogs on ’em; but they’ll tell you all the story, I’ve nodoubt. Now, if you’ll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodoand all, I’d best be turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be
worriting with the night getting thick.’
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. ‘Well,
good night to you all,’ he said. ‘It’s been a queer day, and nomistake. But all’s well as ends well; though perhaps we shouldnot say that until we reach our own doors. I’ll not deny thatI’ll be glad now when I do.’ He lit his lanterns, and got up.Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. ‘Iwas nearly forgetting,’ he said. ‘Mrs. Maggot put this up forMr. Baggins, with her compliments.’ He handed it down andmoved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and good-nights.
They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as
they dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed:from the covered basket he held, the scent of mushroomswas rising.
Chapter5
A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED
‘Now we had better get home ourselves,’ said Merry. ‘There’s
something funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till weget in.’
They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and
well-kept and edged with large white-washed stones. In a
hundred yards or so it brought them to the river-bank, wherethere was a broad wooden landing-stage. A large ﬂat ferry-boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near the
water’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on highposts. Behind them the mists in the ﬂat ﬁelds were now abovethe hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only afew curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank.There seemed to be less fog on the further side.
Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and
the others followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long
pole. The Brandywine ﬂowed slow and broad before them.On the other side the bank was steep, and up it a windingpath climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinklingthere. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, throughstray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows, yellowand red. They were the windows of Brandy Hall, the ancienthome of the Brandybucks.
Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck
family, one of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire,had crossed the river, which was the original boundary ofthe land eastwards. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall,changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down tobecome master of what was virtually a small independentcountry. His family grew and grew, and after his days con-
a conspiracy unmasked 129
tinued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the
low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,
and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and theirnumerous dependants then began to burrow, and later tobuild, all round about. That was the origin of Buckland, athickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest, asort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury,
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall.
The people in the Marish were friendly with the Buck-
landers, and the authority of the Master of the Hall (as thehead of the Brandybuck family was called) was still acknowl-edged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey. But mostof the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders aspeculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter of
fact, they were not very different from the other hobbitsof the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fondof boats, and some of them could swim.
Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but
on that side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It hadbeen planted many generations ago, and was now thick andtall, for it was constantly tended. It ran all the way fromBrandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from theriver, to Haysend (where the Withywindle ﬂowed out of theForest into the Brandywine): well over twenty miles from endto end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection.The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. TheBucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that alsowas not usual in the Shire.
The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buck-
land shore drew nearer. Sam was the only member of theparty who had not been over the river before. He had astrange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his oldlife lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. Hescratched his head, and for a moment had a passing wish thatMr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at Bag End.
The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it
130 the fellowship of the ring
up, and Pippin was already leading the pony up the path,
when Sam (who had been looking back, as if to take farewell
of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:
‘Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?’On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just
make out a ﬁgure: it looked like a dark black bundle leftbehind. But as they looked it seemed to move and sway this
way and that, as if searching the ground. It then crawled, orwent crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.
‘What in the Shire is that?’ exclaimed Merry.‘Something that is following us,’ said Frodo. ‘But don’t ask
any more now! Let’s get away at once!’ They hurried up thepath to the top of the bank, but when they looked back thefar shore was shrouded in mist, and nothing could be seen.
‘Thank goodness you don’t keep any boats on the west-
bank!’ said Frodo. ‘Can horses cross the river?’
‘They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or
they might swim,’ answered Merry. ‘Though I never heard
of any horse swimming the Brandywine. But what havehorses to do with it?’
‘I’ll tell you later. Let’s get indoors and then we can talk.’‘All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I’ll just ride
on and tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We’ll see aboutsupper and things.’
‘We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,’ said
Frodo; ‘but we could do with another.’
‘You shall have it! Give me that basket!’ said Merry, and
rode ahead into the darkness.
It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo’s new
house at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and BrandyHall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struckthe main road of Buckland that ran south from the Bridge.Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane openingon their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as itclimbed up and down into the country.
At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing
a conspiracy unmasked 131
could be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from
the lane in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by
a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosenit, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of thecountry, and there were no other dwellings close by. Youcould get in and out without being noticed. It had been builta long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of guests,
or members of the family that wished to escape from thecrowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old-fashioned countriﬁed house, as much like a hobbit-hole aspossible: it was long and low, with no upper storey; and ithad a roof of turf, round windows, and a large round door.
As they walked up the green path from the gate no light
was visible; the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo
knocked on the door, and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendlylight streamed out. They slipped in quickly and shut them-selves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall withdoors on either side; in front of them a passage ran backdown the middle of the house.
‘Well, what do you think of it?’ asked Merry coming up
the passage. ‘We have done our best in a short time to makeit look like home. After all Fatty and I only got here with thelast cart-load yesterday.’
Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his
own favourite things – or Bilbo’s things (they reminded himsharply of him in their new setting) – were arranged as nearlyas possible as they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant,comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself wishingthat he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retire-ment. It seemed unfair to have put his friends to all thistrouble; and he wondered again how he was going to breakthe news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed atonce. Yet that would have to be done that very night, beforethey all went to bed.
‘It’s delightful!’ he said with an effort. ‘I hardly feel that I
have moved at all.’
***
132 the fellowship of the ring
The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on
the ﬂoor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a
door at the far end. Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
‘A bath!’ cried Pippin. ‘O blessed Meriadoc!’‘Which order shall we go in?’ said Frodo. ‘Eldest ﬁrst, or
quickest ﬁrst? You’ll be last either way, Master Peregrin.’
‘Trust me to arrange things better than that!’ said Merry.
‘We can’t begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths.
In that room there are three tubs, and a copper full of boiling
water. There are also towels, mats and soap. Get inside, andbe quick!’
Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of
the passage, and busied themselves with the ﬁnal preparationsfor a late supper. Snatches of competing songs came from
the bathroom mixed with the sound of splashing and wallow-ing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above theothers in one of Bilbo’s favourite bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of daythat washes the weary mud away!A loon is he that will not sing:O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;but better than rain or rippling streamsis Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;but better is Beer, if drink we lack,and Water Hot poured down the back.
O! Water is fair that leaps on high
in a fountain white beneath the sky;but never did fountain sound so sweetas splashing Hot Water with my feet!
a conspiracy unmasked 133
There was a terriﬁc splash, and a shout of Whoa! from
Frodo. It appeared that a lot of Pippin’s bath had imitated a
fountain and leaped on high.
Merry went to the door: ‘What about supper and beer in
the throat?’ he called. Frodo came out drying his hair.
‘There’s so much water in the air that I’m coming into the
kitchen to ﬁnish,’ he said.
‘Lawks!’ said Merry, looking in. The stone ﬂoor was swim-
ming. ‘You ought to mop all that up before you get anything
to eat, Peregrin,’ he said. ‘Hurry up, or we shan’t wait for you.’
They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the ﬁre.
‘I suppose you three won’t want mushrooms again?’ saidFredegar without much hope.
‘Yes we shall!’ cried Pippin.
‘They’re mine!’ said Frodo. ‘Given to meby Mrs. Maggot,
a queen among farmers’ wives. Take your greedy handsaway, and I’ll serve them.’
Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even
the greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partlyexplains young Frodo’s long expeditions to the renownedﬁelds of the Marish, and the wrath of the injured Maggot.On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according tohobbit standards. There were also many other things to fol-low, and when they had ﬁnished even Fatty Bolger heaved asigh of content. They pushed back the table, and drew chairsround the ﬁre.
‘We’ll clear up later,’ said Merry. ‘Now tell me all about it!
I guess that you have been having adventures, which was notquite fair without me. I want a full account; and most of allI want to know what was the matter with old Maggot, andwhy he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he wasscared , if that is possible.’
‘We have all been scared,’ said Pippin after a pause, in
which Frodo stared at the ﬁre and did not speak. ‘You wouldhave been, too, if you had been chased for two days by BlackRiders.’
134 the fellowship of the ring
‘And what are they?’
‘Black ﬁgures riding on black horses,’ answered Pippin. ‘If
Frodo won’t talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the
beginning.’ He then gave a full account of their journey fromthe time when they left Hobbiton. Sam gave various support-ing nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.
‘I should think you were making it all up,’ said Merry, ‘if
I had not seen that black shape on the landing-stage – and
heard the queer sound in Maggot’s voice. What do you makeof it all, Frodo?’
‘Cousin Frodo has been very close,’ said Pippin. ‘But the
time has come for him to open out. So far we have beengiven nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggot’s guessthat it has something to do with old Bilbo’s treasure.’
‘That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does
notknow anything.’
‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes
on behind his round face that does not come out in his talk.
I’ve heard that he used to go into the Old Forest at one time,and he has the reputation of knowing a good many strangethings. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you thinkhis guess good or bad.’
‘Ithink ,’ answered Frodo slowly, ‘that it was a good guess,
as far as it goes. There isa connexion with Bilbo’s old adven-
tures, and the Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought tosaysearching , for him or for me. I also fear, if you want to
know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not safe here oranywhere else.’ He looked round at the windows and walls,as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The otherslooked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glancesamong themselves.
‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry.
Merry nodded.
‘Well!’ said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his
back, as if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark anylonger. I have got something to tell you all. But I don’t knowquite how to begin.’
a conspiracy unmasked 135
‘I think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling
you some of it myself.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo, looking at him anxiously.
‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because
you don’t know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave theShire, of course. But danger has come on you sooner than youexpected, and now you are making up your mind to go at once.
And you don’t want to. We are very sorry for you.’
Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of
surprise was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’said Pippin. ‘Did you really think you had thrown dust in allour eyes? You have not been nearly careful or clever enoughfor that! You have obviously been planning to go and sayingfarewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have
constantly heard you muttering: ‘‘Shall I ever look downinto that valley again, I wonder’’, and things like that. Andpretending that you had come to the end of your money, andactually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’
‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both
careful and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Isall the Shire discussing my departure then?’
‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret
won’t keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think,only known to us conspirators. After all, you must rememberthat we know you well, and are often with you. We canusually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, too. Totell you the truth, I have been watching you rather closelyever since he left. I thought you would go after him sooneror later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately wehave been very anxious. We have been terriﬁed that youmight give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your ownlike he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open,and done a good deal of planning on our own account. Youare not going to escape so easily!’
‘But I must go,’ said Frodo. ‘It cannot be helped, dear
friends. It is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying
136 the fellowship of the ring
to keep me. Since you have guessed so much, please help me
and do not hinder me!’
‘You do not understand!’ said Pippin. ‘You must go – and
therefore we must, too. Merry and I are coming with you.
Sam is an excellent fellow, and would jump down a dragon’sthroat to save you, if he did not trip over his own feet; butyou will need more than one companion in your dangerous
adventure.’
‘My dear and most beloved hobbits!’ said Frodo deeply
moved. ‘But I could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too.You speak of danger, but you do not understand. This is notreasure-hunt, no there-and-back journey. I am ﬂying fromdeadly peril into deadly peril.’
‘Of course we understand,’ said Merry ﬁrmly. ‘That is
why we have decided to come. We know the Ring is no
laughing-matter; but we are going to do our best to help youagainst the Enemy.’
‘The Ring!’ said Frodo, now completely amazed.‘Yes, the Ring,’ said Merry. ‘My dear old hobbit, you don’t
allow for the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known aboutthe existence of the Ring for years – before Bilbo went away,in fact; but since he obviously regarded it as secret, I kept theknowledge in my head, until we formed our conspiracy. I didnot know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was tooyoung, and he was also more careful – but he was not care-ful enough. If you want to know how I ﬁrst found out, I willtell you.’
‘Go on!’ said Frodo faintly.‘It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you
might expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened tobe walking along the road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenlyin the distance the S.-B.s appeared, coming towards us. Bilboslowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I was sostartled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a moreordinary fashion; but I got through the hedge and walkedalong the ﬁeld inside. I was peeping through into the road,after the S.-B.s had passed, and was looking straight at Bilbo
a conspiracy unmasked 137
when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as he
put something back in his trouser-pocket.
‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I
spied. But you must admit that it was very intriguing, and
I was only in my teens. I must be the only one in the Shire,besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the old fellow’s secretbook.’
‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens
above! Is nothing safe?’
‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only
had one rapid glance, and that was difﬁcult to get. He never
left the book about. I wonder what became of it. I should likeanother look. Have you got it, Frodo?’
‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’
‘Well, as I was saying,’ Merry proceeded, ‘I kept my know-
ledge to myself, till this spring when things got serious. Thenwe formed our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, andmeant business, we have not been too scrupulous. You arenot a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is worse. But if youwant to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can producehim.’
‘Where is he?’ said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected
a masked and sinister ﬁgure to come out of a cupboard.
‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with
a face scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of infor-mation! And he collected a lot, I can tell you, before he wasﬁnally caught. After which, I may say, he seemed to regardhimself as on parole, and dried up.’
‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no
further, and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry,amused, relieved, or merely foolish.
‘Yes, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant
no wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for thatmatter. Hehas some sense, mind you; and when you said go
alone , he said no! take someone as you can trust .’
‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo.Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you
138 the fellowship of the ring
want,’ put in Merry. ‘You can trust us to stick to you through
thick and thin – to the bitter end. And you can trust us to
keep any secret of yours – closer than you keep it yourself.But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and gooff without a word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway:there it is. We know most of what Gandalf has told you. Weknow a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly afraid –
but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’
‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the
Elves’ advice. Gildor said you should take them as was will-ing, and you can’t deny it.’
‘I don’t deny it,’ said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now
grinning. ‘I don’t deny it, but I’ll never believe you are sleep-ing again, whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to
make sure.
‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to
the others. ‘But bless you!’ he laughed, getting up and wavinghis arms, ‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the dangerwere not so dark, I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannothelp feeling happy; happier than I have felt for a long time.I had dreaded this evening.’
‘Good! That’s settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and
company!’ they shouted; and they danced round him. Merryand Pippin began a song, which they had apparently gotready for the occasion.
It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started
Bilbo on his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!Though wind may blow and rain may fall,We must away ere break of dayFar over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,Through moor and waste we ride in haste,And whither then we cannot tell.
a conspiracy unmasked 139
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
‘Very good!’ said Frodo. ‘But in that case there are a lot of
things to do before we go to bed – under a roof, for tonightat any rate.’
‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. ‘Do you really mean
to start before the break of day?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I fear those Black Riders,
and I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially
in a place to which it is known I was going. Also Gildoradvised me not to wait. But I should very much like to seeGandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed when heheard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends ontwo things. How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury?And how soon could we get off? It will take a good deal ofpreparation.’
‘The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that
we could get off in an hour. I have prepared practically every-thing. There are ﬁve ponies in a stable across the ﬁelds; storesand tackle are all packed, except for a few extra clothes, andthe perishable food.’
‘It seems to have been a very efﬁcient conspiracy,’ said
Frodo. ‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safeto wait one day for Gandalf?’
‘That all depends on what you think the Riders would do,
if they found you here,’ answered Merry. ‘They could have
reached here by now, of course, if they were not stopped atthe North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the river-bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would notlet them through by night, though they might break through.Even in the daylight they would try to keep them out, I think,
140 the fellowship of the ring
at any rate until they got a message through to the Master of
the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders,
and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course,Buckland cannot resist a determined attack for long. And itis possible that in the morning even a Black Rider that rodeup and asked for Mr. Baggins would be let through. It ispretty generally known that you are coming back to live at
Crickhollow.’
Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my
mind,’ he said ﬁnally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as itis light. But I am not going by road: it would be safer to waithere than that. If I go through the North-gate my departurefrom Buckland will be known at once, instead of being secret
for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more,the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainlybe watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not.We don’t know how many there are; but there are at leasttwo, and possibly more. The only thing to do is to go off ina quite unexpected direction.’
‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said
Fredegar horriﬁed. ‘You can’t be thinking of doing that. It isquite as dangerous as Black Riders.’
‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I
believe Frodo is right. It is the only way of getting off withoutbeing followed at once. With luck we might get a considerablestart.’
‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected
Fredegar. ‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost.People don’t go in there.’
‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. ‘The Brandybucks go in –
occasionally when the ﬁt takes them. We have a privateentrance. Frodo went in once, long ago. I have been in severaltimes: usually in daylight, of course, when the trees are sleepyand fairly quiet.’
‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more
afraid of the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the
a conspiracy unmasked 141
stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts,
as I am not going on the journey. Still, I am very glad someone
is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what you have done,when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.’
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to
leave the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His familycame from the Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgeﬁelds
in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine Bridge.His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators,was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keepup as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was stillliving at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some oldclothes of Frodo’s to help him in playing the part. They littlethought how dangerous that part might prove.
‘Excellent!’ said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ‘We
could not have left any message behind for Gandalf other-
wise. I don’t know whether these Riders can read or not, ofcourse, but I should not have dared to risk a written message,in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty iswilling to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowingthe way we have gone, that decides me. I am going into theOld Forest ﬁrst thing tomorrow.’
‘Well, that’s that,’ said Pippin. ‘On the whole I would rather
have our job than Fatty’s – waiting here till Black Riderscome.’
‘You wait till you are well inside the Forest,’ said Fredegar.
‘You’ll wish you were back here with me before this timetomorrow.’
‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We
have still got to tidy up and put the ﬁnishing touches to thepacking, before we get to bed. I shall call you all before thebreak of day.’
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for
some time. His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding inthe morning. Eventually he fell into a vague dream, in whichhe seemed to be looking out of a high window over a dark
142 the fellowship of the ring
sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there was
the sound of creatures crawling and snufﬂing. He felt sure
they would smell him out sooner or later.
Then he heard a noise in the distance. At ﬁrst he thought
it was a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Thenhe knew that it was not leaves, but the sound of the Seafar-off; a sound he had never heard in waking life, though it
had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he wasout in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on adark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the air.Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standingalone on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climbthe tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridgetowards the tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and
there was a noise of thunder.
Chapter6
THE OLD FOREST
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry
was standing there with a candle in one hand, and bangingon the door with the other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo,
still shaken and bewildered.
‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past
four and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast
ready. Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies,and fetch the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that
sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and see us off.’
Soon after six o’clock the ﬁve hobbits were ready to start.
Fatty Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of thehouse. Merry went in front leading a laden pony, and tookhis way along a path that went through a spinney behind thehouse, and then cut across several ﬁelds. The leaves of trees
were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass wasgrey with cold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noisesseemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard, someoneclosing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of
the kind loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a longday’s work. They mounted, and soon they were riding offinto the mist, which seemed to open reluctantly before themand close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for aboutan hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Hedgelooming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over withsilver cobwebs.
‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar.‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to
the left along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point whereit bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting
144 the fellowship of the ring
had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went
sloping gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at
the sides, which rose steadily, until suddenly they arched overand formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge andcame out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I
wish you were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will
not need rescuing before the day is out. But good luck to you– today and every day!’
‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I
shall be lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along theEast Road: we shall soon be back on it and going as fast aswe can.’ ‘Good-bye!’ they cried, and rode down the slopeand disappeared from Fredegar’s sight into the tunnel.
It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a
gate of thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the
gate, and when they had all passed through he pushed it toagain. It shut with a clang, and the lock clicked. The soundwas ominous.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘You have left the Shire, and are now
outside, and on the edge of the Old Forest.’
‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin.‘I don’t know what stories you mean,’ Merry answered. ‘If
you mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tellhim, about goblins and wolves and things of that sort, Ishould say no. At any rate I don’t believe them. But theForest isqueer. Everything in it is very much more alive,
more aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things arein the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They watchyou. They are usually content merely to watch you, as longas daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the mostunfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, orgrasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can bemost alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twicebeen in here after dark, and then only near the hedge. Ithought all the trees were whispering to each other, passingnews and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the
the old forest 145
branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say
the trees do actually move, and can surround strangers and
hem them in. In fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: theycame and planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it.But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, andmade a great bonﬁre in the Forest, and burned all the groundin a long strip east of the Hedge. After that the trees gave up
the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There is still awide bare space not far inside where the bonﬁre was made.’
‘Is it only the trees that are dangerous?’ asked Pippin.‘There are various queer things living deep in the Forest,
and on the far side,’ said Merry, ‘or at least I have heard so;but I have never seen any of them. But something makespaths. Whenever one comes inside one ﬁnds open tracks; but
they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queerfashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or was for a longtime, the beginning of quite a broad path leading to theBonﬁre Glade, and then on more or less in our direction, eastand a little north. That is the path I am going to try and ﬁnd.’
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the
wide hollow. On the far side was a faint path leading up onto the ﬂoor of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyondthe Hedge; but it vanished as soon as it brought them underthe trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of theHedge through the stems of trees that were already thick
about them. Looking ahead they could see only tree-trunks
of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight or bent, twisted,leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched;and all the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy,shaggy growths.
Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. ‘You had better lead
on and ﬁnd that path,’ Frodo said to him. ‘Don’t let us loseone another, or forget which way the Hedge lies!’
They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies
plodded along, carefully avoiding the many writhing andinterlacing roots. There was no undergrowth. The ground
146 the fellowship of the ring
was rising steadily, and as they went forward it seemed that
the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no
sound, except an occasional drip of moisture falling throughthe still leaves. For the moment there was no whispering ormovement among the branches; but they all got an uncom-fortable feeling that they were being watched with dis-approval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling
steadily grew, until they found themselves looking up quickly,or glancing back over their shoulders, as if they expected asudden blow.
There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees
seemed constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt thathe could not bear it any longer, and without warning let outa shout. ‘Oi! Oi!’ he cried. ‘I am not going to do anything.
Just let me pass through, will you!’
The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if mufﬂed by
a heavy curtain. There was no echo or answer though thewood seemed to become more crowded and more watchfulthan before.
‘I should not shout, if I were you,’ said Merry. ‘It does
more harm than good.’
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to ﬁnd a way
through, and if he had been right to make the others comeinto this abominable wood. Merry was looking from side toside, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. Pippinnoticed it. ‘It has not taken you long to lose us,’ he said. But atthat moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead.
‘Well, well!’ he said. ‘These trees doshift. There is the
Bonﬁre Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to itseems to have moved away!’
The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they
came out of the trees and found themselves in a wide circularspace. There was sky above them, blue and clear to theirsurprise, for down under the Forest-roof they had not beenable to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. Thesun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into
the old forest 147
the clearing, though its light was on the tree-tops. The leaves
were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade,
enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grew there,only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky and faded hem-locks and wood-parsley, ﬁre-weed seeding into ﬂuffy ashes,and rampant nettles and thistles. A dreary place: but itseemed a charming and cheerful garden after the close Forest.
The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at
the broadening daylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade
there was a break in the wall of trees, and a clear path beyondit. They could see it running on into the wood, wide in placesand open above, though every now and again the trees drewin and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this paththey rode. They were still climbing gently, but they now went
much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed to themthat the Forest had relented, and was going to let them passunhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The
trees drew close again on either side, and they could no longersee far ahead. Now stronger than ever they felt again theill will of the wood pressing on them. So silent was it thatthe fall of their ponies’ hoofs, rustling on dead leaves andoccasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud intheir ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, buthis voice sank to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed landdespair not! For though dark they stand,all woods there be must end at last,and see the open sun go past:the setting sun, the rising sun,the day’s end, or the day begun.For east or west all woods must fai l...
Fail– even as he said the word his voice faded into silence.
The air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome.Just behind them a large branch fell from an old overhanging
148 the fellowship of the ring
tree with a crash into the path. The trees seemed to close in
before them.
‘They do not like all that about ending and failing,’ said
Merry. ‘I should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do
get to the edge, and then we’ll turn and give them a rousingchorus!’
He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did
not show it. The others did not answer. They were depressed.
A heavy weight was settling steadily on Frodo’s heart, andhe regretted now with every step forward that he had everthought of challenging the menace of the trees. He was,indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if thatwas still possible), when things took a new turn. The pathstopped climbing, and became for a while nearly level. The
dark trees drew aside, and ahead they could see the path goingalmost straight forward. Before them, but some distance off,there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald headout of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be makingdirectly for it.
They now hurried forward again, delighted with the
thought of climbing out for a while above the roof of theForest. The path dipped, and then again began to climbupwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep hillside.There it left the trees and faded into the turf. The wood stoodall round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle
round a shaven crown.
The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round
until they reached the top. There they stood and gazed about
them. The air was gleaming and sunlit, but hazy; and theycould not see to any great distance. Near at hand the mistwas now almost gone; though here and there it lay in hollowsof the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep foldcutting right across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam orwisps of white smoke.
‘That,’ said Merry, pointing with his hand, ‘that is the line
of the Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and
the old forest 149
ﬂows south-west through the midst of the Forest to join the
Brandywine below Haysend. We don’t want to go thatway!
The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of the
whole wood – the centre from which all the queerness comes,as it were.’
The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out,
but they could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut
valley; and beyond it the southern half of the Forest fadedfrom view.
The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot. It must have
been about eleven o’clock; but the autumn haze still pre-vented them from seeing much in other directions. In thewest they could not make out either the line of the Hedge orthe valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where
they looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that mightbe the line of the great East Road, for which they weremaking. They were on an island in a sea of trees, and thehorizon was veiled.
On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as
if the slopes of the hill were continued far down under thetrees, like island-shores that really are the sides of a mountainrising out of deep waters. They sat on the green edge andlooked out over the woods below them, while they ate theirmid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed noon theyglimpsed far off in the east the grey-green lines of the Downsthat lay beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheeredthem greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyondthe wood’s borders, though they did not mean to go that way,if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister areputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself.
At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path
that had brought them to the hill reappeared on the north-ward side; but they had not followed it far before they becameaware that it was bending steadily to the right. Soon it beganto descend rapidly and they guessed that it must actuallybe heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the
150 the fellowship of the ring
direction they wished to take. After some discussion they
decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward;
for although they had not been able to see it from the hill-top,the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many milesoff. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the landseemed to be drier and more open, climbing up to slopeswhere the trees were thinner, and pines and ﬁrs replaced the
oaks and ashes and other strange and nameless trees of thedenser wood.
At ﬁrst their choice seemed to be good: they got along at
a fair speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sunin an open glade they seemed unaccountably to have veeredeastwards. But after a time the trees began to close in again,just where they had appeared from a distance to be thinner
and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were dis-covered unexpectedly, like the ruts of great giant-wheels orwide moats and sunken roads long disused and choked withbrambles. These lay usually right across their line of march,and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out again,which was troublesome and difﬁcult with their ponies. Eachtime they climbed down they found the hollow ﬁlled with thickbushes and matted undergrowth, which somehow would notyield to the left, but only gave way when they turned to theright; and they had to go some distance along the bottombefore they could ﬁnd a way up the further bank. Each timethey clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and darker; andalways to the left and upwards it was most difﬁcult to ﬁnd away, and they were forced to the right and downwards.
After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direc-
tion, though they knew well enough that they had long ceasedto go northward at all. They were being headed off, and weresimply following a course chosen for them – eastwards andsouthwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it.
The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and
stumbled into a fold that was wider and deeper than any theyhad yet met. It was so steep and overhung that it proved
the old forest 151
impossible to climb out of it again, either forwards or back-
wards, without leaving their ponies and their baggage behind.
All they could do was to follow the fold – downwards. Theground grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared inthe banks, and soon they found themselves following a brookthat trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then theground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong
and noisy, ﬂowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were ina deep dim-lit gully over-arched by trees high above them.
After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they
came quite suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gatethey saw the sunlight before them. Coming to the openingthey found that they had made their way down through acleft in a high steep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a
wide space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could beglimpsed another bank almost as steep. A golden afternoonof late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden landbetween. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river ofbrown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched overwith willows, blocked with fallen willows, and ﬂecked withthousands of faded willow-leaves. The air was thick withthem, ﬂuttering yellow from the branches; for there was awarm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and thereeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.
‘Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!’
said Merry. ‘We have come almost in the opposite directionto which we intended. This is the River Withywindle! I willgo on and explore.’
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the
long grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported thatthere was fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and theriver; in some places ﬁrm turf went down to the water’s edge.‘What’s more,’ he said, ‘there seems to be something like afootpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turnleft and follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the eastside of the Forest eventually.’
‘I dare say!’ said Pippin. ‘That is, if the track goes on so
152 the fellowship of the ring
far, and does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.
Who made the track, do you suppose, and why? I am sure it
was not for our beneﬁt. I am getting very suspicious of thisForest and everything in it, and I begin to believe all thestories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward weshould have to go?’
‘No,’ said Merry, ‘I haven’t. I don’t know in the least how
far down the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly
come here often enough to make a path along it. But there isno other way out that I can see or think of.’
There being nothing else for it, they ﬁled out, and Merry
led them to the path that he had discovered. Everywhere thereeds and grasses were lush and tall, in places far above theirheads; but once found, the path was easy to follow, as it
turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground amongthe bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills,running down gullies into the Withywindle out of the higherforest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks orbundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of
ﬂies of all kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoonsun was burning on their backs. At last they came suddenlyinto a thin shade; great grey branches reached across thepath. Each step forward became more reluctant than the last.Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up
their legs, and falling softly out of the air upon their heads
and eyes.
Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front
of him Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. ‘It’sno good,’ he heard Merry saying. ‘Can’t go another step with-out rest. Must have nap. It’s cool under the willows. Less ﬂies!’
Frodo did not like the sound of this. ‘Come on!’ he cried.
‘We can’t have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forestﬁrst.’ But the others were too far gone to care. Beside themSam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.
Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His
the old forest 153
head swam. There now seemed hardly a sound in the air.
The ﬂies had stopped buzzing. Only a gentle noise on the
edge of hearing, a soft ﬂuttering as of a song half whispered,seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyesand saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary.Enormous it looked, its sprawling branches going up likereaching arms with many long-ﬁngered hands, its knotted
and twisted trunk gaping in wide ﬁssures that creaked faintlyas the boughs moved. The leaves ﬂuttering against the brightsky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fellupon the grass.
Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay
down with their backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them thegreat cracks gaped wide to receive them as the tree swayed
and creaked. They looked up at the grey and yellow leaves,moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut theireyes, and then it seemed that they could almost hear words,cool words, saying something about water and sleep. Theygave themselves up to the spell and fell fast asleep at the footof the great grey willow.
Frodo lay for a while ﬁghting with the sleep that was over-
powering him; then with an effort he struggled to his feetagain. He felt a compelling desire for cool water. ‘Wait forme, Sam,’ he stammered. ‘Must bathe feet a minute.’
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side
of the tree, where great winding roots grew out into thestream, like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink. Hestraddled one of these, and paddled his hot feet in the coolbrown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with hisback against the tree.
Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a
cavern. He was worried. The afternoon was getting late, andhe thought this sudden sleepiness uncanny. ‘There’s morebehind this than sun and warm air,’ he muttered to himself.‘I don’t like this great big tree. I don’t trust it. Hark at itsinging about sleep now! This won’t do at all!’
154 the fellowship of the ring
He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what
had become of the ponies. He found that two had wandered
on a good way along the path; and he had just caught themand brought them back towards the others, when he heardtwo noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. Onewas the splash of something heavy falling into the water; theother was a noise like the snick of a lock when a door quietly
closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close
to the edge, and a great tree-root seemed to be over him andholding him down, but he was not struggling. Sam grippedhim by the jacket, and dragged him from under the root; andthen with difﬁculty hauled him on to the bank. Almost atonce he woke, and coughed and spluttered.
‘Do you know, Sam,’ he said at length, ‘the beastly tree
threw me in! I felt it. The big root just twisted round and
tipped me in!’
‘You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘You
shouldn’t sit in such a place, if you feel sleepy.’
‘What about the others?’ Frodo asked. ‘I wonder what sort
of dreams they are having.’
They went round to the other side of the tree, and then
Sam understood the click that he had heard. Pippin had
vanished. The crack by which he had laid himself had closedtogether, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry wastrapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legslay outside, but the rest of him was inside a dark opening,the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers.
Frodo and Sam beat ﬁrst upon the tree-trunk where Pippin
had lain. They then struggled frantically to pull open the jawsof the crack that held poor Merry. It was quite useless.
‘What a foul thing to happen!’ cried Frodo wildly. ‘Why did
we ever come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all backat Crickhollow!’ He kicked the tree with all his strength, heed-less of his own feet. A hardly perceptible shiver ran throughthe stem and up into the branches; the leaves rustled andwhispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.
the old forest 155
‘I suppose we haven’t got an axe among our luggage, Mr.
Frodo?’ asked Sam.
‘I brought a little hatchet for chopping ﬁrewood,’ said
Frodo. ‘That wouldn’t be much use.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by
ﬁrewood. ‘We might do something with ﬁre!’
‘We might,’ said Frodo doubtfully. ‘We might succeed in
roasting Pippin alive inside.’
‘We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,’
said Sam ﬁercely. ‘If it don’t let them go, I’ll have it down, if
I have to gnaw it.’ He ran to the ponies and before long cameback with two tinder-boxes and a hatchet.
Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of
bark; and made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks.
These they heaped against the trunk on the far side of thetree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had struck a sparkinto the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a ﬂurry of ﬂameand smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little ﬁngers of ﬁrelicked against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree andscorched it. A tremor ran through the whole willow. Theleaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of painand anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from farinside the tree they heard Pippin give a mufﬂed yell.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ cried Merry. ‘He’ll squeeze me in
two, if you don’t. He says so!’
‘Who? What?’ shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other
side of the tree.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ begged Merry. The branches of the
willow began to sway violently. There was a sound as of awind rising and spreading outwards to the branches of all theother trees round about, as though they had dropped a stoneinto the quiet slumber of the river-valley and set up ripplesof anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked atthe little ﬁre and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, withoutany clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped for, ranalong the path crying help! help! help! It seemed to him that
he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill voice: it was
156 the fellowship of the ring
blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He
felt desperate: lost and witless.
Suddenly he stopped. There was an answer, or so he
thought; but it seemed to come from behind him, away downthe path further back in the Forest. He turned round andlistened, and soon there could be no doubt: someone was
singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly andhappily, but it was singing nonsense:
Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo
and Sam now both stood still. Suddenly out of a long string
of nonsense-words (or so they seemed) the voice rose uploud and clear and burst into this song:
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My darling!Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,There my pretty lady is, River-woman’s daughter,Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! and merry-o,Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!Tom’s in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.Tom’s going home again water-lilies bringing.Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed
out. The leaves hung silently again on stiff branches. Therewas another burst of song, and then suddenly, hopping and
the old forest 157
dancing along the path, there appeared above the reeds an
old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather
stuck in the band. With another hop and a bound there cameinto view a man, or so it seemed. At any rate he was too largeand heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one of theBig People, though he made noise enough for one, stumpingalong with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. Hehad a blue coat and a long brown beard; his eyes were blueand bright, and his face was red as a ripe apple, but creasedinto a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his hands he carriedon a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water-lilies.
‘Help!’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with
their hands stretched out.
‘Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up
one hand, and they stopped short, as if they had been struck
stiff. ‘Now, my little fellows, where be you a-going to, pufﬁnglike a bellows? What’s the matter here then? Do you knowwho I am? I’m Tom Bombadil. Tell me what’s your trouble!Tom’s in a hurry now. Don’t you crush my lilies!’
‘My friends are caught in the willow-tree,’ cried Frodo
breathlessly.
‘Master Merry’s being squeezed in a crack!’ cried Sam.‘What?’ shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. ‘Old
Man Willow? Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon bemended. I know the tune for him. Old grey Willow-man! I’llfreeze his marrow cold, if he don’t behave himself. I’ll singhis roots off. I’ll sing a wind up and blow leaf and branchaway. Old Man Willow!’
Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to the
tree. There he saw Merry’s feet still sticking out – the resthad already been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouthto the crack and began singing into it in a low voice. Theycould not catch the words, but evidently Merry was aroused.His legs began to kick. Tom sprang away, and breaking offa hanging branch smote the side of the willow with it. ‘Youlet them out again, Old Man Willow!’ he said. ‘What be you
158 the fellowship of the ring
a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig
deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!’ He
then seized Merry’s feet and drew him out of the suddenlywidening crack.
There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open,
and out of it Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Thenwith a loud snap both cracks closed fast again. A shudder ran
through the tree from root to tip, and complete silence fell.
‘Thank you!’ said the hobbits, one after the other.Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. ‘Well, my little fellows!’
said he, stooping so that he peered into their faces. ‘You shallcome home with me! The table is all laden with yellow cream,honeycomb, and white bread and butter. Goldberry is wait-ing. Time enough for questions around the supper table. You
follow after me as quick as you are able!’ With that he pickedup his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his handwent hopping and dancing along the path eastward, stillsinging loudly and nonsensically.
Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed
after him as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough.Tom soon disappeared in front of them, and the noise of hissinging got fainter and further away. Suddenly his voice cameﬂoating back to them in a loud halloo!
Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!Tom’s going on ahead candles for to kindle.
Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.Hey now! merry dol! We’ll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the
sun seemed to sink into the trees behind them. They thoughtof the slanting light of evening glittering on the BrandywineRiver, and the windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam
the old forest 159
with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them;
trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over
the path. White mists began to rise and curl on the surfaceof the river and stray about the roots of the trees upon itsborders. Out of the very ground at their feet a shadowy steamarose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difﬁcult to follow the path, and they were very
tired. Their legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran
among the bushes and reeds on either side of them; and ifthey looked up to the pale sky, they caught sight of queergnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against thetwilight, and leered down at them from the high bank andthe edges of the wood. They began to feel that all this countrywas unreal, and that they were stumbling through an ominous
dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they
noticed that the ground was gently rising. The water beganto murmur. In the darkness they caught the white glimmerof foam, where the river ﬂowed over a short fall. Then sud-denly the trees came to an end and the mists were left behind.They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweepof grass welling up before them. The river, now small andswift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting hereand there in the light of the stars, which were already shiningin the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it
had been mown or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behindwere clipped, and trim as a hedge. The path was now plainbefore them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It woundup on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the palestarry night; and there, still high above them on a furtherslope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. Down againthe path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillsideof turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beamﬂowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There wasTom Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill.Behind it a steep shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and
160 the fellowship of the ring
beyond that the dark shapes of the Barrow-downs stalked
away into the eastern night.
They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half
their weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey!
Come merry dol! rolled out the song to greet them.
Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!
Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as
Spring, like the song of a glad water ﬂowing down into thenight from a bright morning in the hills, came falling like
silver to meet them:
Now let the song begin! Let us sing togetherOf sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!
And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold,
and a golden light was all about them.
Chapter7
IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL
The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and
stood still, blinking. They were in a long low room, ﬁlled withthe light of lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and
on the table of dark polished wood stood many candles, tall
and yellow, burning brightly.
In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer
door, sat a woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down hershoulders; her gown was green, green as young reeds, shot
with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was of gold, shapedlike a chain of ﬂag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of forget-me-nots. About her feet in wide vessels of green and brownearthenware, white water-lilies were ﬂoating, so that sheseemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool.
‘Enter, good guests!’ she said, and as she spoke they knew
that it was her clear voice they had heard singing. They came
a few timid steps further into the room, and began to bowlow, feeling strangely surprised and awkward, like folk that,knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of water, havebeen answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in livingﬂowers. But before they could say anything, she sprang lightlyup and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them;and as she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in theﬂowering borders of a river.
‘Come dear folk!’ she said, taking Frodo by the hand. ‘Laugh
and be merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.’ Thenlightly she passed them and closing the door she turned herback to it, with her white arms spread out across it. ‘Let us shutout the night!’ she said. ‘For you are still afraid, perhaps, of mist
and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. Fear
nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.’
162 the fellowship of the ring
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at
each of them and smiled. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ said Frodo
at last, feeling his heart moved with a joy that he did notunderstand. He stood as he had at times stood enchanted byfair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon himwas different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeperand nearer to mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange.
‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ he said again. ‘Now the joy that washidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me.
O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water!O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves’ laughter!’
Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with sur-
prise to hear himself saying such things. But Goldberrylaughed.
‘Welcome!’ she said. ‘I had not heard that folk of the Shire
were so sweet-tongued. But I see that you are an Elf-friend;the light in your eyes and the ring in your voice tells it. Thisis a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait for the Master ofthe house! He will not be long. He is tending your tiredbeasts.’
The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs,
while Goldberry busied herself about the table; and their eyes
followed her, for the slender grace of her movement ﬁlled
them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind the housecame the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught,among many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding
dillo the repeated words:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
‘Fair lady!’ said Frodo again after a while. ‘Tell me, if my
asking does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?’
in the house of tom bombadil 163
‘He is,’ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and
smiling.
Frodo looked at her questioningly. ‘He is, as you have seen
him,’ she said in answer to his look. ‘He is the Master of
wood, water, and hill.’
‘Then all this strange land belongs to him?’‘No indeed!’ she answered, and her smile faded. ‘That
would indeed be a burden,’ she added in a low voice, as if to
herself. ‘The trees and the grasses and all things growing orliving in the land belong each to themselves. Tom Bombadilis the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom walking inthe forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops underlight and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.’
A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now
no hat and his thick brown hair was crowned with autumn
leaves. He laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand.
‘Here’s my pretty lady!’ he said, bowing to the hobbits.
‘Here’s my Goldberry clothed all in silver-green with ﬂowersin her girdle! Is the table laden? I see yellow cream andhoneycomb, and white bread, and butter; milk, cheese, andgreen herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for us?Is the supper ready?’
‘It is,’ said Goldberry; ‘but the guests perhaps are not?’Tom clapped his hands and cried: ‘Tom, Tom! your guests
are tired, and you had near forgotten! Come now, my merryfriends, and Tom will refresh you! You shall clean grimyhands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your muddycloaks and comb out your tangles!’
He opened the door, and they followed him down a short
passage and round a sharp turn. They came to a low roomwith a sloping roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on to thenorth end of the house). Its walls were of clean stone, butthey were mostly covered with green hanging mats and yellowcurtains. The ﬂoor was ﬂagged, and strewn with fresh greenrushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled withwhite blankets, laid on the ﬂoor along one side. Against theopposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware
164 the fellowship of the ring
basins, and beside it stood brown ewers ﬁlled with water,
some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers
set ready beside each bed.
Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated
at the table, two on each side, while at either end sat Gold-berry and the Master. It was a long and merry meal. Though
the hobbits ate, as only famished hobbits can eat, there wasno lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed to be clearcold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set freetheir voices. The guests became suddenly aware that theywere singing merrily, as if it was easier and more natural thantalking.
At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table
swiftly. The guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were
set in chairs, each with a footstool to his tired feet. There wasa ﬁre in the wide hearth before them, and it was burningwith a sweet smell, as if it were built of apple-wood. Wheneverything was set in order, all the lights in the room wereput out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each endof the chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood beforethem, holding a candle; and she wished them each a goodnight and deep sleep.
‘Have peace now,’ she said, ‘until the morning! Heed no
nightly noises! For nothing passes door and window heresave moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.Good night!’ She passed out of the room with a glimmer anda rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream fallinggently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night.
Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of
them tried to muster the courage to ask one of the manyquestions he had meant to ask at supper. Sleep gathered ontheir eyelids. At last Frodo spoke:
‘Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that
brought you at that moment?’
Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream.
‘Eh, what?’ said he. ‘Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not
in the house of tom bombadil 165
hear: I was busy singing. Just chance brought me then, if
chance you call it. It was no plan of mine, though I was
waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that youwere wandering. We guessed you’d come ere long down tothe water: all paths lead that way, down to Withywindle. Oldgrey Willow-man, he’s a mighty singer; and it’s hard for littlefolk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom had an errand
there, that he dared not hinder.’ Tom nodded as if sleep wastaking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice:
I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,the last ere the year’s end to keep them from the winter,to ﬂower by her pretty feet till the snows are melted.
Each year at summer’s end I go to ﬁnd them for her,in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;there they open ﬁrst in spring and there they linger latest.By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glintof blue:
And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longergo down deep again along the forest-water,not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passingOld Man Willow’s house this side of spring-time,not till the merry spring, when the River-daughterdances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.
He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one
more question: the one he most desired to have answered.‘Tell us, Master,’ he said, ‘about the Willow-man. What ishe? I have never heard of him before.’
‘No, don’t!’ said Merry and Pippin together, sitting sud-
denly upright. ‘Not now! Not until the morning!’
166 the fellowship of the ring
‘That is right!’ said the old man. ‘Now is the time for
resting. Some things are ill to hear when the world’s in
shadow. Sleep till the morning-light, rest on the pillow! Heedno nightly noise! Fear no grey willow!’ And with that he tookdown the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a candle ineither hand he led them out of the room.
Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the
blankets were of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves
on the deep beds and drawn the light covers over them beforethey were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then
he saw the young moon rising; under its thin light thereloomed before him a black wall of rock, pierced by a dark
arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that he was liftedup, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circleof hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of theplain stood a pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not madeby hands. On its top stood the ﬁgure of a man. The moon asit rose seemed to hang for a moment above his head andglistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from thedark plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howl-ing of many wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape ofgreat wings, passed across the moon. The ﬁgure lifted hisarms and a light ﬂashed from the staff that he wielded. Amighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voiceswailed and the wolves yammered. There was a noise like astrong wind blowing, and on it was borne the sound of hoofs,galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. ‘Black Riders!’thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofsstill echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever againhave the courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. Helay motionless, still listening; but all was now silent, and atlast he turned and fell asleep again or wandered into someother unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change
came over his dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly
in the house of tom bombadil 167
he woke, or thought he had waked, and yet still heard in the
darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream: tip-tap ,
squeak : the noise was like branches fretting in the wind,
twig-ﬁngers scraping wall and window: creak ,creak ,creak .
He wondered if there were willow-trees close to the house;
and then suddenly he had a dreadful feeling that he was notin an ordinary house at all, but inside the willow and listening
to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. Hesat up, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he laydown again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of wordsin his ears: ‘Fear nothing! Have peace until the morning!Heed no nightly noises!’ Then he went to sleep again.
It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his
quiet sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading,
spreading irresistibly all round the house into a dark shorelesspool. It gurgled under the walls, and was rising slowly butsurely. ‘I shall be drowned!’ he thought. ‘It will ﬁnd its wayin, and then I shall drown.’ He felt that he was lying in a softslimy bog, and springing up he set his foot on the corner ofa cold hard ﬂagstone. Then he remembered where he wasand lay down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing:‘Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and star-light and the wind off the hill-top.’ A little breath of sweet airmoved the curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again.
As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night
in deep content, if logs are contented.
They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom
was moving about the room whistling like a starling. Whenhe heard them stir he clapped his hands, and cried: ‘Hey!Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!’ He drew back theyellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had coveredthe windows, at either end of the room, one looking east andthe other looking west.
They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window,
and found himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey withdew. He had half expected to see turf right up to the walls,
168 the fellowship of the ring
turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually his view was
screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against thesunrise. It was a pale morning: in the East, behind long cloudslike lines of soiled wool stained red at the edges, lay glimmer-ing deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come; but thelight was broadening quickly, and the red ﬂowers on the
beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.
Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool
of mist. The Forest was hidden under a fog. It was likelooking down on to a sloping cloud-roof from above. Therewas a fold or channel where the mist was broken into manyplumes and billows: the valley of the Withywindle. Thestream ran down the hill on the left and vanished into the
white shadows. Near at hand was a ﬂower-garden and aclipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shavengrass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to beseen.
‘Good morning, merry friends!’ cried Tom, opening the
eastern window wide. A cool air ﬂowed in; it had a rainysmell. ‘Sun won’t show her face much today, I’m thinking. Ihave been walking wide, leaping on the hill-tops, since thegrey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass under-foot, wet sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singingunder window; but naught wakes hobbit-folk in the earlymorning. In the night little folk wake up in the darkness, andsleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, mymerry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillodel! derry del, my hearties! If you come soon you’ll ﬁndbreakfast on the table. If you come late you’ll get grass andrain-water!’
Needless to say – not that Tom’s threat sounded very
serious – the hobbits came soon, and left the table late andonly when it was beginning to look rather empty. NeitherTom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard aboutthe house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down thestairs, and singing here and there outside. The room looked
in the house of tom bombadil 169
westward over the mist-clouded valley, and the window was
open. Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above.
Before they had ﬁnished breakfast the clouds had joined intoan unbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly andsteadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was com-pletely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently
as if it was ﬂowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear
voice of Goldberry singing up above them. They could hearfew words, but it seemed plain to them that the song was arain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the taleof a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea farbelow. The hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was gladin his heart, and blessed the kindly weather, because it
delayed them from departing. The thought of going had beenheavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessednow that they would not go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter
clouds rolled up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads ofthe Downs. Nothing could be seen all round the house butfalling water. Frodo stood near the open door and watchedthe white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and gobubbling away down into the valley. Tom Bombadil cametrotting round the corner of the house, waving his arms as ifhe was warding off the rain – and indeed when he sprang
over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his boots.
These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then hesat in the largest chair and called the hobbits to gather roundhim.
‘This is Goldberry’s washing day,’ he said, ‘and her
autumn-cleaning. Too wet for hobbit-folk – let them restwhile they are able! It’s a good day for long tales, for questionsand for answers, so Tom will start the talking.’
He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes
half as if speaking to himself, sometimes looking at themsuddenly with a bright blue eye under his deep brows. Often
170 the fellowship of the ring
his voice would turn to song, and he would get out of his
chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and ﬂowers,
the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest,about the evil things and good things, things friendly andthings unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and secretshidden under brambles.
As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the
Forest, apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as
the strangers where all other things were at home. Movingconstantly in and out of his talk was Old Man Willow, andFrodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more thanenough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom’s words laidbare the hearts of trees and their thoughts, which were oftendark and strange, and ﬁlled with a hatred of things that go free
upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burning:destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forestwithout reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vastforgotten woods; and in it there lived yet, ageing no quickerthan the hills, the fathers of the fathers of trees, rememberingtimes when they were lords. The countless years had ﬁlledthem with pride and rooted wisdom, and with malice. Butnone were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heartwas rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning,and a master of winds, and his song and thought ran throughthe woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spiritdrew power out of the earth and spread like ﬁne root-threadsin the ground, and invisible twig-ﬁngers in the air, till it hadunder its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from theHedge to the Downs.
Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up
the young stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles andworn rocks, and among small ﬂowers in close grass and wetcrannies, wandering at last up on to the Downs. They heardof the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills. Sheepwere bleating in ﬂocks. Green walls and white walls rose.There were fortresses on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms
in the house of tom bombadil 171
fought together, and the young Sun shone like ﬁre on the red
metal of their new and greedy swords. There was victory and
defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and ﬂameswent up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of deadkings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stonedoors were shut; and the grass grew over all. Sheep walkedfor a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were empty
again. A shadow came out of dark places far away, and thebones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wights walked inthe hollow places with a clink of rings on cold ﬁngers, andgold chains in the wind. Stone rings grinned out of the groundlike broken teeth in the moonlight.
The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of
the Barrow-wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest
had been heard. But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked tolisten to, even by a comfortable ﬁreside far away. These fournow suddenly remembered what the joy of this house haddriven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestledunder the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost thethread of his tale and shifted uneasily, looking aside at oneanother.
When they caught his words again they found that he had
now wandered into strange regions beyond their memory andbeyond their waking thought, into times when the world waswider, and the seas ﬂowed straight to the western Shore; andstill on and back Tom went singing out into ancient starlight,when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly hestopped, and they saw that he nodded as if he was fallingasleep. The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and itseemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind hadgone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had beenwithdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, andall the sky was ﬁlled with the light of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many
days had passed Frodo could not tell. He did not feel eitherhungry or tired, only ﬁlled with wonder. The stars shonethrough the window and the silence of the heavens seemed
172 the fellowship of the ring
to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a
sudden fear of that silence:
‘Who are you, Master?’ he asked.
‘Eh, what?’ said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in
the gloom. ‘Don’t you know my name yet? That’s the onlyanswer. Tell me, who are you, alone, yourself and nameless?But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that’s what I am.
Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the riverand the trees; Tom remembers the ﬁrst raindrop and the ﬁrstacorn. He made paths before the Big People, and saw thelittle People arriving. He was here before the Kings and thegraves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed west-ward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. Heknew the dark under the stars when it was fearless – before
the Dark Lord came from Outside.’
A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits
glanced hastily through the panes. When they turned again,Goldberry stood in the door behind, framed in light. She helda candle, shielding its ﬂame from the draught with her hand;and the light ﬂowed through it, like sunlight through a whiteshell.
‘The rain has ended,’ she said; ‘and new waters are running
downhill, under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!’
‘And let us have food and drink!’ cried Tom. ‘Long tales
are thirsty. And long listening’s hungry work, morning, noon,and evening!’ With that he jumped out of his chair, and witha bound took a candle from the chimney-shelf and lit it inthe ﬂame that Goldberry held; then he danced about thetable. Suddenly he hopped through the door and dis-appeared.
Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then
Tom and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half inwonder and half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Gold-berry and so merry and odd the caperings of Tom. Yet insome fashion they seemed to weave a single dance, neitherhindering the other, in and out of the room, and round aboutthe table; and with great speed food and vessels and lights
in the house of tom bombadil 173
were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and
yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said
Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed allin silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like ﬁshes’mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washedforget-me-nots, and he had green stockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under
the spell of Tom’s words may have missed one meal or many,
but when the food was before them it seemed at least a weeksince they had eaten. They did not sing or even speak muchfor a while, and paid close attention to business. But after atime their hearts and spirits rose high again, and their voicesrang out in mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them,
songs that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into
silence; and in the silences they saw in their minds pools andwaters wider than any they had known, and looking into themthey saw the sky below them and the stars like jewels in thedepths. Then once more she wished them each good nightand left them by the ﬁreside. But Tom now seemed wideawake and plied them with questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all
their families, and indeed to know much of all the historyand doings of the Shire down from days hardly rememberedamong the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised them;but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledgelargely to Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as aperson of more importance than they had imagined. ‘There’searth under his old feet, and clay on his ﬁngers; wisdom inhis bones, and both his eyes are open,’ said Tom. It was alsoclear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemedthat in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildorconcerning the ﬂight of Frodo.
Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his
questioning, that Frodo found himself telling him more aboutBilbo and his own hopes and fears than he had told before
174 the fellowship of the ring
even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down, and
there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.
‘Show me the precious Ring!’ he said suddenly in the midst
of the story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out
the chain from his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handedit at once to Tom.
It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and
laughed. For a second the hobbits had a vision, both comicaland alarming, of his bright blue eye gleaming through a circleof gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the end of his littleﬁnger and held it up to the candlelight. For a momentthe hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then theygasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing!
Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air
– and it vanished with a ﬂash. Frodo gave a cry – and Tom
leaned forward and handed it back to him with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one
who has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, orlooked the same and weighed the same: for that Ring hadalways seemed to Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand.But something prompted him to make sure. He was perhapsa triﬂe annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light ofwhat even Gandalf thought so perilously important. Hewaited for an opportunity, when the talk was going again,and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and theirqueer ways – then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a
start, and checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (ina way): it was his own ring all right, for Merry was staringblankly at his chair, and obviously could not see him. He gotup and crept quietly away from the ﬁreside towards the outerdoor.
‘Hey there!’ cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most
seeing look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there!Where be you a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind asthat yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand’s more fair
in the house of tom bombadil 175
without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside
me! We must talk a while more, and think about the morning.
Tom must teach the right road, and keep your feet fromwandering.’
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the
Ring he came and sat down again. Tom now told them thathe reckoned the Sun would shine tomorrow, and it would be
a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful. But theywould do well to start early; for weather in that country wasa thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and itwould change sometimes quicker than he could change hisjacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is aught thatgoes on two legs.’
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from
his house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs:
they might hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day’sjourney, and avoid the Barrows. He told them not to be afraid– but to mind their own business.
‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with
old stone or cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless yoube strong folk with hearts that never falter!’ He said this morethan once; and he advised them to pass barrows by on thewest-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he taughtthem a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into anydanger or difﬁculty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped
them each on the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candlesled them back to their bedroom.
Chapter8
FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS
That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or
out of them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweetsinging running in his mind: a song that seemed to come like
a pale light behind a grey rain-curtain, and growing stronger
to turn the veil all to glass and silver, until at last it was rolledback, and a far green country opened before him under aswift sunrise.
The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whist-
ling like a tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting
down the hill and through the open window. Outside every-thing was green and pale gold.
After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made
ready to say farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possibleon such a morning: cool, bright, and clean under a washed
autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh from the North-west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, snifﬁng andmoving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved hishat and danced upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits toget up and be off and go with good speed.
They rode off along a path that wound away from behind
the house, and went slanting up towards the north end of thehill-brow under which it sheltered. They had just dismountedto lead their ponies up the last steep slope, when suddenlyFrodo stopped.
‘Goldberry!’ he cried. ‘My fair lady, clad all in silver green!
We have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since theevening!’ He was so distressed that he turned back; but atthat moment a clear call came rippling down. There on the
hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair was ﬂying
loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A
fog on the barrow-downs 177
light like the glint of water on dewy grass ﬂashed from under
her feet as she danced.
They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless
beside her. They bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade
them look round; and they looked out from the hill-top overlands under the morning. It was now as clear and far-seen asit had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll
in the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and greenout of the dark trees in the West. In that direction the landrose in wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under the sun,beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. Tothe South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was adistant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River madea great loop in the lowlands and ﬂowed away out of the
knowledge of the hobbits. Northward beyond the dwindlingdowns the land ran away in ﬂats and swellings of grey andgreen and pale earth-colours, until it faded into a featurelessand shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose,ridge behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out ofeyesight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue anda remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky,but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of thehigh and distant mountains.
They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and
a few stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. Itseemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpledskirts of the downs towards the Road, when they should beleaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones of the hillsstraight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and
thoughts. ‘Speed now, fair guests!’ she said. ‘And hold toyour purpose! North with the wind in the left eye and ablessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun shines!’And to Frodo she said: ‘Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merrymeeting!’
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and
mounted his pony, and followed by his friends jogged slowly
178 the fellowship of the ring
down the gentle slope behind the hill. Tom Bombadil’s house
and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view. The air grew
warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, andthe scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed.Turning back, when they reached the bottom of the greenhollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like asunlit ﬂower against the sky: she was standing still watching
them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. Asthey looked she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand sheturned and vanished behind the hill.
Their way wound along the ﬂoor of the hollow, and round
the green feet of a steep hill into another deeper and broadervalley, and then over the shoulders of further hills, and down
their long limbs, and up their smooth sides again, up on tonew hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no treenor any visible water: it was a country of grass and shortspringy turf, silent except for the whisper of the air over theedges of the land, and high lonely cries of strange birds. Asthey journeyed the sun mounted, and grew hot. Each timethey climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less.When they caught a glimpse of the country westward thedistant Forest seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain wassteaming up again from leaf and root and mould. A shadownow lay round the edge of sight, a dark haze above which theupper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy.
About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide
and ﬂattened, like a shallow saucer with a green moundedrim. Inside there was no air stirring, and the sky seemed neartheir heads. They rode across and looked northwards. Thentheir hearts rose; for it seemed plain that they had comefurther already than they had expected. Certainly the dis-tances had now all become hazy and deceptive, but therecould be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end.A long valley lay below them winding away northwards, untilit came to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond,there seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly
fog on the barrow-downs 179
glimpsed a long dark line. ‘That is a line of trees,’ said Merry,
‘and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues
east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say theywere planted in the old days.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘If we make as good going this
afternoon as we have done this morning, we shall have leftthe Downs before the Sun sets and be jogging on in search
of a camping place.’ But even as he spoke he turned hisglance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills werehigher and looked down upon them; and all those hills werecrowned with green mounds, and on some were standingstones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums.
That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from
the sight and went down into the hollow circle. In the midst
of it there stood a single stone, standing tall under the sunabove, and at this hour casting no shadow. It was shapelessand yet signiﬁcant: like a landmark, or a guarding ﬁnger, ormore like a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sunwas still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs againstthe east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had hadno power to warm it; but at that time this seemed pleasant.There they took food and drink, and made as good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the foodcame from ‘down under Hill’. Tom had provided them withplenty for the comfort of the day. Their ponies unburdenedstrayed upon the grass.
Riding over the hills, and eating their ﬁll, the warm sun
and the scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching outtheir legs and looking at the sky above their noses: thesethings are, perhaps, enough to explain what happened. How-ever that may be: they woke suddenly and uncomfortablyfrom a sleep they had never meant to take. The standingstone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretchedeastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, wasgleaming through the mist just above the west wall of thehollow in which they lay; north, south, and east, beyond the
180 the fellowship of the ring
wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent,
heavy and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together
with their heads down.
The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the
western rim. They found that they were upon an island inthe fog. Even as they looked out in dismay towards the settingsun, it sank before their eyes into a white sea, and a cold grey
shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up tothe walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent overtheir heads until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall ofmist whose central pillar was the standing stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did
not quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful viewthey had had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still
knew in which direction it lay. In any case, they now had sogreat a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that nothought of remaining there was in their minds. They packedup as quickly as their chilled ﬁngers would work.
Soon they were leading their ponies in single ﬁle over the
rim and down the long northward slope of the hill, down intoa foggy sea. As they went down the mist became colderand damper, and their hair hung lank and dripping on theirforeheads. When they reached the bottom it was so chill thatthey halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon becamebedewed with grey drops. Then, mounting their ponies, theywent slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and fall ofthe ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess,for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the longvalley which they had seen in the morning. Once they werethrough the gap, they had only to keep on in anything like astraight line and they were bound in the end to strike theRoad. Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for avague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs there mightbe no fog.
Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separ-
ated and wandering in different directions they went in ﬁle,
fog on the barrow-downs 181
with Frodo leading. Sam was behind him, and after him came
Pippin, and then Merry. The valley seemed to stretch on
endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either sideahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and heguessed that they were at last approaching the gap in thehills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could passthat, they would be free.
‘Come on! Follow me!’ he called back over his shoulder,
and he hurried forward. But his hope soon changed to bewil-
derment and alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but theyshrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous before himand leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars ofa headless door, two huge standing stones. He could notremember having seen any sign of these in the valley, when
he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had passedbetween them almost before he was aware: and even as hedid so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony rearedand snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he foundthat he was alone: the others had not followed him.
‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don’t
you keep up?’
There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past
the stones shouting wildly: ‘Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!’ Thepony bolted into the mist and vanished. From some way off,or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: ‘Hoy! Frodo!Hoy!’ It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under thegreat stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plungedoff in the direction of the call, and found himself going steeplyuphill.
As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling
more and more frantically; but he heard no answer for sometime, and then it seemed faint and far ahead and high abovehim. ‘Frodo! Hoy!’ came the thin voices out of the mist: andthen a cry that sounded like help,help! often repeated, ending
with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he couldtowards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging
182 the fellowship of the ring
night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be
sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing
up and up.
Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told
him when he at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He wasweary, sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark.
‘Where are you?’ he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly
aware that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind
was beginning to blow, an icy wind. A change was comingin the weather. The mist was ﬂowing past him now in shredsand tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness wasless near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise
that faint stars were appearing overhead amid the strands ofhurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over thegrass.
He imagined suddenly that he caught a mufﬂed cry, and
he made towards it; and even as he went forward the mist wasrolled up and thrust aside, and the starry sky was unveiled. Aglance showed him that he was now facing southwards andwas on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed fromthe north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. Tohis right there loomed against the westward stars a dark blackshape. A great barrow stood there.
‘Where are you?’ he cried again, both angry and afraid.‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come
out of the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’
‘No!’ said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave,
and he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there wasno sound. Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall darkﬁgure like a shadow against the stars. It leaned over him. Hethought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a palelight that seemed to come from some remote distance. Thena grip stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icytouch froze his bones, and he remembered no more.
***
fog on the barrow-downs 183
When he came to himself again, for a moment he could
recall nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he
knew that he was imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in abarrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he was probablyalready under the dreadful spells of the Barrow-wights aboutwhich whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay ashe found himself: ﬂat on his back upon a cold stone with his
hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part
of the very darkness that was round him, he found himselfas he lay thinking about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of theirjogging along together in the lanes of the Shire and talkingabout roads and adventures. There is a seed of couragehidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest
and most timid hobbit, waiting for some ﬁnal and desperatedanger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor verytimid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (andGandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. Hethought he had come to the end of his adventure, and aterrible end, but the thought hardened him. He found himselfstiffening, as if for a ﬁnal spring; he no longer felt limp like ahelpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he
noticed all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way:a pale greenish light was growing round him. It did not atﬁrst show him what kind of a place he was in, for the lightseemed to be coming out of himself, and from the ﬂoor besidehim, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, andthere in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin,and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces lookeddeathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them laymany treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light theylooked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, goldchains were about their waists, and on their ﬁngers were manyrings. Swords lay by their sides, and shields were at their feet.But across their three necks lay one long naked sword.
***
184 the fellowship of the ring
Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling.
The voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, some-
times high in the air and thin, sometimes like a low moanfrom the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad buthorrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shapethemselves: grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable.The night was railing against the morning of which it was
bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for which ithungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while thesong became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceivedthat it had changed into an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,and cold be sleep under stone:
never more to wake on stony bed,never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.In the black wind the stars shall die,and still on gold here let them lie,till the dark lord lifts his handover dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound.
Raising himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in thepale light that they were in a kind of passage which behindthem turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm wasgroping, walking on its ﬁngers towards Sam, who was lying
nearest, and towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.
At ﬁrst Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into
stone by the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came
to him. He wondered if he put on the Ring, whether theBarrow-wight would miss him, and he might ﬁnd some wayout. He thought of himself running free over the grass, griev-ing for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive him-self. Gandalf would admit that there had been nothing elsehe could do.
But the courage that had been awakened in him was now
too strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He
fog on the barrow-downs 185
wavered, groping in his pocket, and then fought with himself
again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve
hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay besidehim, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of hiscompanions. With what strength he had he hewed at thecrawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off; but atthe same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There
was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was asnarling noise.
Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold.
All at once back into his mind, from which it had disappearedwith the ﬁrst coming of the fog, came the memory of thehouse down under the Hill, and of Tom singing. He re-membered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that
name his voice seemed to grow strong: it had a full andlively sound, and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum andtrumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could
hear his heart beating. After a long slow moment he heardplain, but far away, as if it was coming down through theground or through thick walls, an answering voice singing:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.
There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and
falling, and suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plainlight of day. A low door-like opening appeared at the end of
186 the fellowship of the ring
the chamber beyond Frodo’s feet; and there was Tom’s head
(hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of the sun
rising red behind him. The light fell upon the ﬂoor, and uponthe faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They didnot stir, but the sickly hue had left them. They looked nowas if they were only very deeply asleep.
Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark
chamber, singing:
Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!
Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.
At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end
of the chamber fell in with a crash. Then there was a longtrailing shriek, fading away into an unguessable distance; andafter that silence.
‘Come, friend Frodo!’ said Tom. ‘Let us get out on to
clean grass! You must help me bear them.’
Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As
Frodo left the barrow for the last time he thought he saw asevered hand wriggling still, like a wounded spider, in a heapof fallen earth. Tom went back in again, and there was a
sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out
he was bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things ofgold, silver, copper, and bronze; many beads and chains andjewelled ornaments. He climbed the green barrow and laidthem all on top in the sunshine.
There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in
his hair, and looked down upon the three hobbits, that hadbeen laid on their backs upon the grass at the west side ofthe mound. Raising his right hand he said in a clear andcommanding voice:
fog on the barrow-downs 187
Wake now my merry lads! Wake and hear me calling!
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;
Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.Night under Night is ﬂown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their
arms, rubbed their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They
looked about in amazement, ﬁrst at Frodo, and then at Tomstanding large as life on the barrow-top above them; and thenat themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and beltedwith pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.
‘What in the name of wonder?’ began Merry, feeling the
golden circlet that had slipped over one eye. Then he
stopped, and a shadow came over his face, and he closed hiseyes. ‘Of course, I remember!’ he said. ‘The men of CarnDuˆm came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the
spear in my heart!’ He clutched at his breast. ‘No! No!’ hesaid, opening his eyes. ‘What am I saying? I have been dream-ing. Where did you get to, Frodo?’
‘I thought that I was lost,’ said Frodo; ‘but I don’t want
to speak of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let usgo on!’
‘Dressed up like this, sir?’ said Sam. ‘Where are my
clothes?’ He ﬂung his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, andlooked round helplessly, as if he expected to ﬁnd his cloak,jacket, and breeches, and other hobbit-garments lying some-where to hand.
‘You won’t ﬁnd your clothes again,’ said Tom, bounding
down from the mound, and laughing as he danced roundthem in the sunlight. One would have thought that nothingdangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the horrorfaded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw themerry glint in his eyes.
‘What do you mean?’ asked Pippin, looking at him, half
puzzled and half amused. ‘Why not?’
But Tom shook his head, saying: ‘You’ve found your-
selves again, out of the deep water. Clothes are but little loss,
188 the fellowship of the ring
if you escape from drowning. Be glad, my merry friends,
and let the warm sunlight heat now heart and limb! Cast off
these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goesa-hunting!’
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking
down after him Frodo saw him running away southwardsalong the green hollow between their hill and the next, still
whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching
it, until he was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some
time his hey now! hoy now! came ﬂoating back down the wind,
which had shifted round towards the south.
The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran
about for a while on the grass, as he told them. Then theylay basking in the sun with the delight of those that have beenwafted suddenly from bitter winter to a friendly clime, or ofpeople that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake one dayto ﬁnd that they are unexpectedly well and the day is againfull of promise.
By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong
(and hungry). He reappeared, hat ﬁrst, over the brow of thehill, and behind him came in an obedient line sixponies:
their own ﬁve and one more. The last was plainly old FattyLumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) thantheir own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, hadnot, in fact, given them any such names, but they answeredto the new names that Tom had given them for the rest oftheir lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbedover the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to thehobbits.
fog on the barrow-downs 189
‘Here are your ponies, now!’ he said. ‘They’ve more sense
(in some ways) than you wandering hobbits have – more
sense in their noses. For they sniff danger ahead which youwalk right into; and if they run to save themselves, then theyrun the right way. You must forgive them all; for though theirhearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow-wights is not whatthey were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all
their burdens!’
Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare
garments from their packs; and they soon felt too hot, forthey were obliged to put on some of the thicker and warmerthings that they had brought against the oncoming of winter.
‘Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin,
come from?’ asked Frodo.
‘He’s mine,’ said Tom. ‘My four-legged friend; though I
seldom ride him, and he wanders often far, free upon the
hillsides. When your ponies stayed with me, they got to knowmy Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the night, and quicklyran to meet him. I thought he’d look for them and with hiswords of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jollyLumpkin, old Tom’s going to ride. Hey! he’s coming withyou, just to set you on the road; so he needs a pony. For youcannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you’re onyour own legs trying to trot beside them.’
The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom
many times; but he laughed, and said that they were so goodat losing themselves that he would not feel happy till he hadseen them safe over the borders of his land. ‘I’ve got thingsto do,’ he said: ‘my making and my singing, my talking andmy walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can’t bealways near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has hishouse to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.’
It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine
and ten, and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Theirlast meal had been lunch beside the standing stone the daybefore. They breakfasted now off the remainder of Tom’s
190 the fellowship of the ring
provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that Tom
had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering
hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much better forit. While they were eating Tom went up to the mound, andlooked through the treasures. Most of these he made into apile that glistered and sparkled on the grass. He bade themlie there ‘free to all ﬁnders, birds, beasts, Elves or Men, and
all kindly creatures’; for so the spell of the mound should bebroken and scattered and no Wight ever come back to it. Hechose for himself from the pile a brooch set with blue stones,many-shaded like ﬂax-ﬂowers or the wings of blue butterﬂies.He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shakinghis head, and saying at last:
‘Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was
she who long ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall
wear it now, and we will not forget her!’
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-
shaped, and keen, of marvellous workmanship, damaskedwith serpent-forms in red and gold. They gleamed as hedrew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strangemetal, light and strong, and set with many ﬁery stones.Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of thespell that lay on the mound, the blades seemed untouchedby time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
‘Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,’
he said. ‘Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk gowalking, east, south, or far away into dark and danger.’ Thenhe told them that these blades were forged many long yearsago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the Dark Lord,but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Du ˆm in the
Land of Angmar.
‘Few now remember them,’ Tom murmured, ‘yet still
some go wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in lone-liness, guarding from evil things folk that are heedless.’
The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke
they had a vision as it were of a great expanse of years behindthem, like a vast shadowy plain over which there strode
fog on the barrow-downs 191
shapes of Men, tall and grim with bright swords, and last
came one with a star on his brow. Then the vision faded, and
they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again.They made ready, packing their bags and lading their ponies.Their new weapons they hung on their leather belts undertheir jackets, feeling them very awkward, and wondering ifthey would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred
to any of them as one of the adventures in which their ﬂightwould land them.
At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill;
and then mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. Theylooked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill,and from it the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow
ﬂame. Then they turned a shoulder of the Downs and it washidden from view.
Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no
sign of the great stones standing like a gate, and before longthey came to the northern gap and rode swiftly through, andthe land fell away before them. It was a merry journey withTom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them,on Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than hisgirth promised. Tom sang most of the time, but it was chieﬂynonsense, or else perhaps a strange language unknown to thehobbits, an ancient language whose words were mainly thoseof wonder and delight.
They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the
Road was further away than they had imagined. Even withouta fog, their sleep at mid-day would have prevented them fromreaching it until after nightfall on the day before. The darkline they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of bushesgrowing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on thefurther side. Tom said that it had once been the boundary ofa kingdom, but a very long time ago. He seemed to remembersomething sad about it, and would not say much.
They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap
in the wall, and then Tom turned due north, for they had
192 the fellowship of the ring
been bearing somewhat to the west. The land was now open
and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, but the sun
was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of talltrees ahead, and they knew that they had come back to theRoad after many unexpected adventures. They galloped theirponies over the last furlongs, and halted under the longshadows of the trees. They were on the top of a sloping bank,
and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound awaybelow them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west toNorth-east, and on their right it fell quickly down into a widehollow. It was rutted and bore many signs of the recent heavyrain; there were pools and pot-holes full of water.
They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There
was nothing to be seen. ‘Well, here we are again at last!’ said
Frodo. ‘I suppose we haven’t lost more than two days by myshort cut through the Forest! But perhaps the delay will proveuseful – it may have put them off our trail.’
The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the
Black Riders came suddenly over them again. Ever since theyhad entered the Forest they had thought chieﬂy of gettingback to the Road; only now when it lay beneath their feet didthey remember the danger which pursued them, and wasmore than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Roaditself. They looked anxiously back towards the setting sun,but the Road was brown and empty.
‘Do you think,’ asked Pippin hesitatingly, ‘do you think we
may be pursued, tonight?’
‘No, I hope not tonight,’ answered Tom Bombadil; ‘nor
perhaps the next day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannottell for certain. Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is notmaster of Riders from the Black Land far beyond hiscountry.’
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them.
They felt that he would know how to deal with Black Riders,if anyone did. They would soon now be going forward intolands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but the mostvague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering
fog on the barrow-downs 193
twilight they longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense
of loss was on them. They stood silent, reluctant to make the
ﬁnal parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom waswishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heartand to ride on till dark without halting.
‘Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after
that your own luck must go with you and guide you): four
miles along the Road you’ll come upon a village, Bree underBree-hill, with doors looking westward. There you’ll ﬁnd anold inn that is called The Prancing Pony . Barliman Butterbur
is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, andafterwards the morning will speed you upon your way. Bebold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts, and ride to meetyour fortune!’
They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and
drink once more with them; but he laughed and refused,
saying:
Tom’s country ends here: he will not pass the borders.Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!
Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin’sback, and rode up over the bank and away singing into thedusk.
The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out
of sight.
‘I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,’ said Sam.
‘He’s a caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a gooddeal further and see naught better, nor queerer. But I won’tdeny I’ll be glad to see this Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope
it’ll be like The Green Dragon away back home! What sort of
folk are they in Bree?’
‘There are hobbits in Bree,’ said Merry, ‘as well as Big
Folk. I daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good
inn by all accounts. My people ride out there now and again.’
‘It may be all we could wish,’ said Frodo; ‘but it is outside
the Shire all the same. Don’t make yourselves too much at
194 the fellowship of the ring
home! Please remember – all of you – that the name of
Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any
name must be given.’
They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into
the evening. Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded
slowly downhill and up again, until at last they saw lightstwinkling some distance ahead.
Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass
against misty stars; and under its western ﬂank nestled a large
village. Towards it they now hurried desiring only to ﬁnd aﬁre, and a door between them and the night.
Chapter9
AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY
Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited
region, like an island in the empty lands round about. BesidesBree itself, there was Staddle on the other side of the hill,
Combe in a deep valley a little further eastward, and Archet
on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round Bree-hill and thevillages was a small country of ﬁelds and tamed woodlandonly a few miles broad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather
short, cheerful and independent: they belonged to nobody
but themselves; but they were more friendly and familiar withHobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of the worldabout them than was (or is) usual with Big People. Accordingto their own tales they were the original inhabitants and werethe descendants of the ﬁrst Men that ever wandered into the
West of the middle-world. Few had survived the turmoils ofthe Elder Days; but when the Kings returned again over theGreat Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and theywere still there now, when the memory of the old Kings hadfaded into the grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far
west, or within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in thewild lands beyond Bree there were mysterious wanderers.The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing oftheir origin. They were taller and darker than the Men ofBree and were believed to have strange powers of sightand hearing, and to understand the languages of beastsand birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwardseven as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now
few and rarely seen. When they appeared they brought
news from afar, and told strange forgotten tales which were
196 the fellowship of the ring
eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends
of them.
There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land;
andtheyclaimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the
world, one that was founded long before even the Brandy-
wine was crossed and the Shire colonized. They lived mostlyin Staddle though there were some in Bree itself, especially
on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men.The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another)were on friendly terms, minding their own affairs in theirown ways, but both rightly regarding themselves as necessaryparts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world was thispeculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found.
The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel
much; and the affairs of the four villages were their chief
concern. Occasionally the Hobbits of Bree went as far asBuckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though their little land wasnot much further than a day’s riding east of the BrandywineBridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. Anoccasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would come outto the Inn for a night or two, but even that was becomingless and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred to those ofBree, and to any others that lived beyond the borders, asOutsiders, and took very little interest in them, consideringthem dull and uncouth. There were probably many moreOutsiders scattered about in the West of the World in thosedays than the people of the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless,were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any bankand stay only as long as it suited them. But in the Bree-land,at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and nomore rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It wasnot yet forgotten that there had been a time when there wasmuch coming and going between the Shire and Bree. Therewas Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.
The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the
Big Folk, mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with
at the sign of the prancing pony 197
windows looking west. On that side, running in more than
half a circle from the hill and back to it, there was a deep dike
with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this the Roadcrossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it wasbarred by a great gate. There was another gate in the southerncorner where the Road ran out of the village. The gates wereclosed at nightfall; but just inside them were small lodges for
the gatekeepers.
Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round
the foot of the hill, there was a large inn. It had been builtlong ago when the trafﬁc on the roads had been far greater.For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways; another ancientroad crossed the East Road just outside the dike at the westernend of the village, and in former days Men and other folk
of various sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News
from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending
from those days, when news from North, South, and Eastcould be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbitsused to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Landshad long been desolate, and the North Road was now seldomused: it was grass-grown, and the Bree-folk called it theGreenway.
The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper
was an important person. His house was a meeting place forthe idle, talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, largeand small, of the four villages; and a resort of Rangers andother wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly dwarves) asstill journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.
It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and
his companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing anddrew near the village. They came to the West-gate and foundit shut; but at the door of the lodge beyond it, there was aman sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and lookedover the gate at them in surprise.
‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he
asked grufﬂy.
198 the fellowship of the ring
‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We
are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.’
‘Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what’s more, out of the Shire
by their talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to
himself. He stared at them darkly for a moment, and thenslowly opened the gate and let them ride through.
‘We don’t often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,’
he went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You’ll
pardon my wondering what business takes you away east ofBree! What may your names be, might I ask?’
‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does
not seem a good place to discuss them,’ said Frodo, not likingthe look of the man or the tone of his voice.
‘Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but
it’s my business to ask questions after nightfall.’
‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to
travel and to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr.
Brandybuck. Is that enough for you? The Bree-folk used tobe fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.’
‘All right, all right!’ said the man. ‘I meant no offence. But
you’ll ﬁnd maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gatewill be asking you questions. There’s queer folk about. If yougo on to The Pony , you’ll ﬁnd you’re not the only guests.’
He wished them good night, and they said no more; but
Frodo could see in the lantern-light that the man was stilleyeing them curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang tobehind them, as they rode forward. He wondered why theman was so suspicious, and whether anyone had been askingfor news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf?He might have arrived, while they were delayed in the Forestand the Downs. But there was something in the look and thevoice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.
The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then
he went back to his house. As soon as his back was turned, adark ﬁgure climbed quickly in over the gate and melted intothe shadows of the village street.
***
at the sign of the prancing pony 199
The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few
detached houses, and drew up outside the inn. The houses
looked large and strange to them. Sam stared up at the inn withits three storeys and many windows, and felt his heart sink.He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees, andother creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in thecourse of his journey; but at the moment he was ﬁnding his
ﬁrst sight of Men and their tall houses quite enough, indeedtoo much for the dark end of a tiring day. He pictured blackhorses standing all saddled in the shadows of the inn-yard,and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.
‘We surely aren’t going to stay here for the night, are we,
sir?’ he exclaimed. ‘If there are hobbit-folk in these parts,why don’t we look for some that would be willing to take us
in? It would be more homelike.’
‘What’s wrong with the inn?’ said Frodo. ‘Tom Bombadil
recommended it. I expect it’s homelike enough inside.’
Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to
familiar eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wingsrunning back on land partly cut out of the lower slopes ofthe hill, so that at the rear the second-ﬂoor windows werelevel with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to acourtyard between the two wings, and on the left under thearch there was a large doorway reached by a few broad steps.The door was open and light streamed out of it. Above thearch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a large sign-board: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over thedoor was painted in white letters: the prancing pony by
barlimanbutterbur . Many of the lower windows showed
lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began
singing a merry song inside, and many cheerful voices joinedloudly in the chorus. They listened to this encouraging soundfor a moment and then got off their ponies. The song endedand there was a burst of laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them
standing in the yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went
200 the fellowship of the ring
forward and nearly bumped into a short fat man with a bald
head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and was
bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying atray laden with full mugs.
‘Can we——’ began Frodo.‘Half a minute, if you please!’ shouted the man over his
shoulder, and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of
smoke. In a moment he was out again, wiping his hands onhis apron.
‘Good evening, little master!’ he said, bending down. ‘What
may you be wanting?’
‘Beds for four, and stabling for ﬁve ponies, if that can be
managed. Are you Mr. Butterbur?’
‘That’s right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at
your service! You’re from the Shire, eh?’ he said, and then
suddenly he clapped his hand to his forehead, as if trying toremember something. ‘Hobbits!’ he cried. ‘Now what doesthat remind me of? Might I ask your names, sirs?’
‘Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,’ said Frodo; ‘and this is
Sam Gamgee. My name is Underhill.’
‘There now!’ said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his ﬁngers. ‘It’s
gone again! But it’ll come back, when I have time to think.I’m run off my feet; but I’ll see what I can do for you. Wedon’t often get a party out of the Shire nowadays, and Ishould be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is sucha crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn’t been forlong enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.’
‘Hi! Nob!’ he shouted. ‘Where are you, you woolly-footed
slowcoach? Nob!’
‘Coming, sir! Coming!’ A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed
out of a door, and seeing the travellers, stopped short andstared at them with great interest.
‘Where’s Bob?’ asked the landlord. ‘You don’t know? Well,
ﬁnd him! Double sharp! I haven’t got six legs, nor six eyesneither! Tell Bob there’s ﬁve ponies that have to be stabled.He must ﬁnd room somehow.’ Nob trotted off with a grinand a wink.
at the sign of the prancing pony 201
‘Well now, what was I going to say?’ said Mr. Butterbur,
tapping his forehead. ‘One thing drives out another, so to
speak. I’m that busy tonight, my head is going round. There’sa party that came up the Greenway from down South lastnight – and that was strange enough to begin with. Thenthere’s a travelling company of dwarves going West come inthis evening. And now there’s you. If you weren’t hobbits, I
doubt if we could house you. But we’ve got a room or twoin the north wing that were made special for hobbits, whenthis place was built. On the ground ﬂoor as they usuallyprefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you’ll becomfortable. You’ll be wanting supper, I don’t doubt. Assoon as may be. This way now!’
He led them a short way down a passage, and opened
a door. ‘Here is a nice little parlour!’ he said. ‘I hope it will
suit. Excuse me now. I’m that busy. No time for talking. Imust be trotting. It’s hard work for two legs, but I don’t getthinner. I’ll look in again later. If you want anything, ring thehand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don’t come, ring andshout!’
Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless.
He seemed capable of an endless stream of talk, howeverbusy he might be. They found themselves in a small and cosyroom. There was a bit of bright ﬁre burning on the hearth,and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs.There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth,and on it was a large hand-bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant,came bustling in long before they thought of ringing. Hebrought candles and a tray full of plates.
‘Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?’ he asked.
‘And shall I show you the bedrooms, while your supper isgot ready?’
They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs
of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again. In atwinkling the table was laid. There was hot soup, cold meats,a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter, and half a ripecheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show,
202 the fellowship of the ring
and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam’s misgivings
(already much relieved by the excellence of the beer).
The landlord hovered round for a little, and then prepared
to leave them. ‘I don’t know whether you would care to join
the company, when you have supped,’ he said, standingat the door. ‘Perhaps you would rather go to your beds. Stillthe company would be very pleased to welcome you, if
you had a mind. We don’t get Outsiders – travellers fromthe Shire, I should say, begging your pardon – often; and welike to hear a bit of news, or any story or song you mayhave in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lackanything!’
So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of
their supper (about three quarters of an hour’s steady going,
not hindered by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, andSam decided to join the company. Merry said it would betoo stuffy. ‘I shall sit here quietly by the ﬁre for a bit, andperhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps andQs, and don’t forget that you are supposed to be escaping insecret, and are still on the high-road and not very far fromthe Shire!’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘Mind yourself! Don’t get lost, and
don’t forget that it is safer indoors!’
The company was in the big common-room of the inn.
The gathering was large and mixed, as Frodo discovered,
when his eyes got used to the light. This came chieﬂy from
a blazing log-ﬁre, for the three lamps hanging from the beamswere dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur wasstanding near the ﬁre, talking to a couple of dwarves and oneor two strange-looking men. On the benches were variousfolk: men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits (sittingchattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vagueﬁgures difﬁcult to make out away in the shadows and corners.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus
of welcome from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especiallythose that had come up the Greenway, stared at them
at the sign of the prancing pony 203
curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to the
Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names,
they were seldom sure who the names belonged to. The Menof Bree seemed all to have rather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heather-toes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mentionButterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The
Mugworts, for instance, seemed numerous. But most of themhad natural names, such as Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which were used in theShire. There were several Underhills from Staddle, and asthey could not imagine sharing a name without being related,they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive,
and Frodo soon found that some explanation of what he was
doing would have to be given. He gave out that he wasinterested in history and geography (at which there was muchwagging of heads, although neither of these words weremuch used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking ofwriting a book (at which there was silent astonishment), andthat he and his friends wanted to collect information abouthobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the easternlands.
At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really
wanted to write a book, and had had many ears, he wouldhave learned enough for several chapters in a few minutes.And if that was not enough, he was given a whole list ofnames, beginning with ‘Old Barliman here’, to whom hecould go for further information. But after a time, as Frododid not show any sign of writing a book on the spot, thehobbits returned to their questions about doings in theShire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soonfound himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and lookingaround.
The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant
events and telling news of a kind that was becoming only toofamiliar. There was trouble away in the South, and it seemed
204 the fellowship of the ring
that the Men who had come up the Greenway were on the
move, looking for lands where they could ﬁnd some peace.
The Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very readyto take a large number of strangers into their little land. Oneof the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was fore-telling that more and more people would be coming north inthe near future. ‘If room isn’t found for them, they’ll ﬁnd it
for themselves. They’ve a right to live, same as other folk,’he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased atthe prospect.
The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, as it
did not at the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folkcould hardly beg for lodgings in hobbit-holes. They weremore interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now feeling
quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in theShire. Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an accountof the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in MichelDelving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit inthe Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came outlike a ﬂoured dumpling. But there were several questionsasked that made Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in the Shire several times,wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who theywere related to.
Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-
beaten man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was alsolistening intently to the hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard infront of him, and was smoking a long-stemmed pipe curiouslycarved. His legs were stretched out before him, showing highboots of supple leather that ﬁtted him well, but had seenmuch wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stainedcloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawn close about him,and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood thatovershadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could beseen as he watched the hobbits.
‘Who is that?’ Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whis-
per to Mr. Butterbur. ‘I don’t think you introduced him?’
at the sign of the prancing pony 205
‘Him?’ said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking
an eye without turning his head. ‘I don’t rightly know. He is
one of the wandering folk – Rangers we call them. He seldomtalks: not but what he can tell a rare tale when he has themind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then hepops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring;but I haven’t seen him about lately. What his right name is
I’ve never heard: but he’s known round here as Strider. Goesabout at a great pace on his long shanks; though he don’t tellnobody what cause he has to hurry. But there’s no accountingfor East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangersand the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you shouldask about him.’ But at that moment Mr. Butterbur was calledaway by a demand for more ale and his last remark remained
unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he
had heard or guessed all that had been said. Presently, witha wave of his hand and a nod, he invited Frodo to come overand sit by him. As Frodo drew near he threw back his hood,showing a shaggy head of dark hair ﬂecked with grey, and ina pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes.
‘I am called Strider,’ he said in a low voice. ‘I am very
pleased to meet you, Master – Underhill, if old Butterbur gotyour name right.’
‘He did,’ said Frodo stifﬂy. He felt far from comfortable
under the stare of those keen eyes.
‘Well, Master Underhill,’ said Strider, ‘if I were you, I
should stop your young friends from talking too much. Drink,ﬁre, and chance-meeting are pleasant enough, but, well – thisisn’t the Shire. There are queer folk about. Though I say itas shouldn’t, you may think,’ he added with a wry smile,seeing Frodo’s glance. ‘And there have been even strangertravellers through Bree lately,’ he went on, watching Frodo’sface.
Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made
no further sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be ﬁxed onPippin. To his alarm Frodo became aware that the ridiculous
206 the fellowship of the ring
young Took, encouraged by his success with the fat Mayor of
Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic account of
Bilbo’s farewell party. He was already giving an imitationof the Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishingDisappearance.
Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most
of the local hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those
funny people away beyond the River; but some (oldButterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and had prob-ably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo’s vanishing. Itwould bring the name of Baggins to their minds, especially ifthere had been inquiries in Bree after that name.
Frodo ﬁdgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evi-
dently much enjoying the attention he was getting, and had
become quite forgetful of their danger. Frodo had a suddenfear that in his present mood he might even mention theRing; and that might well be disastrous.
‘You had better do something quick!’ whispered Strider in
his ear.
Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk.
The attention of Pippin’s audience was disturbed. Some ofthe hobbits looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, think-ing that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as was goodfor him.
Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as
was his habit when making a speech) ﬁngering the things inhis pocket. He felt the Ring on its chain, and quite unac-countably the desire came over him to slip it on and vanishout of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as ifthe suggestion came to him from outside, from someone orsomething in the room. He resisted the temptation ﬁrmly,and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if to keep a hold on itand prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At anyrate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke ‘a few suitablewords’, as they would have said in the Shire: We are all very
much gratiﬁed by the kindness of your reception, and I ventureto hope that my brief visit will help to renew the old ties of
at the sign of the prancing pony 207
friendship between the Shire and Bree ; and then he hesitated
and coughed.
Everyone in the room was now looking at him. ‘A song!’
shouted one of the hobbits. ‘A song! A song!’ shouted all the
others. ‘Come on now, master, sing us something that wehaven’t heard before!’
For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation
he began a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond
of (and indeed rather proud of, for he had made up the wordshimself). It was about an inn; and that is probably why itcame into Frodo’s mind just then. Here it is in full. Only afew words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his ﬁll.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a ﬁve-stringed ﬁddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there’s good cheer among the guests,He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a horne ´d cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
208 the fellowship of the ring
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday *there’s a special pair,
And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail;
A dish and a spoon on the table danced,
The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.
The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.
Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:
‘The white horses of the Moon,
They neigh and champ their silver bits;But their master’s been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun’ll be rising soon!’
So the cat on his ﬁddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:
He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
‘It’s after three!’ he said.
They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.
*See note 2, III, p.1462
at the sign of the prancing pony 209
Now quicker the ﬁddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the ﬂoor.
With a ping and a pong the ﬁddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.
The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She*hardly believed her ﬁery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good
voice, and the song tickled their fancy. ‘Where’s old Barley?’
they cried. ‘He ought to hear this. Bob ought to learn his catthe ﬁddle, and then we’d have a dance.’ They called for moreale, and began to shout: ‘Let’s have it again, master! Comeon now! Once more!’
They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his
song again, while many of them joined in; for the tune was
well known, and they were quick at picking up words. It was
now Frodo’s turn to feel pleased with himself. He caperedabout on the table; and when he came a second time to the
cow jumped over the Moon , he leaped in the air. Much too
vigorously; for he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs,and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash, clatter,and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide forlaughter, and stopped short in gaping silence; for the singer
*Elves (and Hobbits) always refer to the Sun as She.
210 the fellowship of the ring
disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap
through the ﬂoor without leaving a hole!
The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang
to their feet and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew
away from Pippin and Sam, who found themselves left alonein a corner, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance.It was plain that many people regarded them now as the
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers andpurpose. But there was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stoodlooking at them with a knowing and half-mocking expressionthat made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he slippedout of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: thetwo had been whispering together a good deal during theevening.
Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled
away under the tables to the dark corner by Strider, who sat
unmoved, giving no sign of his thoughts. Frodo leaned backagainst the wall and took off the Ring. How it came to be onhis ﬁnger he could not tell. He could only suppose that hehad been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and thatsomehow it had slipped on when he stuck out his hand witha jerk to save his fall. For a moment he wondered if the Ringitself had not played him a trick; perhaps it had tried to revealitself in response to some wish or command that was felt inthe room. He did not like the looks of the men that had goneout.
‘Well?’ said Strider, when he reappeared. ‘Why did you do
that? Worse than anything your friends could have said! Youhave put your foot in it! Or should I say your ﬁnger?’
‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Frodo, annoyed and
alarmed.
‘Oh yes, you do,’ answered Strider; ‘but we had better wait
until the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr.Baggins , I should like a quiet word with you.’
‘What about?’ asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his
proper name.
‘A matter of some importance – to us both,’ answered
at the sign of the prancing pony 211
Strider, looking Frodo in the eye. ‘You may hear something
to your advantage.’
‘Very well,’ said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. ‘I’ll
talk to you later.’
Meanwhile an argument was going on by the ﬁreplace. Mr.
Butterbur had come trotting in, and he was now trying to
listen to several conﬂicting accounts of the event at the sametime.
‘I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,’ said a hobbit; ‘or leastways I
didn’t see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished intothin air, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You don’t say, Mr. Mugwort!’ said the landlord, looking
puzzled.
‘Yes I do!’ replied Mugwort. ‘And I mean what I say,
what’s more.’
‘There’s some mistake somewhere,’ said Butterbur, shak-
ing his head. ‘There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to
go vanishing into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likelyin this room.’
‘Well, where is he now?’ cried several voices.‘How should I know? He’s welcome to go where he will,
so long as he pays in the morning. There’s Mr. Took, now:he’s not vanished.’
‘Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn’t,’ said
Mugwort obstinately.
‘And I say there’s some mistake,’ repeated Butterbur,
picking up the tray and gathering up the broken crockery.
‘Of course there’s a mistake!’ said Frodo. ‘I haven’t van-
ished. Here I am! I’ve just been having a few words withStrider in the corner.’
He came forward into the ﬁrelight; but most of the com-
pany backed away, even more perturbed than before. Theywere not in the least satisﬁed by his explanation that he hadcrawled away quickly under the tables after he had fallen.Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then andthere in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that
212 the fellowship of the ring
evening. One or two gave Frodo a black look and departed
muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and the two or
three strange Men that still remained got up and said goodnight to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Beforelong no one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, bythe wall.
Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned,
very probably, that his house would be full again on many
future nights, until the present mystery had been thoroughlydiscussed. ‘Now what have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?’he asked. ‘Frightening my customers and breaking up mycrocks with your acrobatics!’
‘I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,’ said Frodo.
‘It was quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate
accident.’
‘All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you’re going to do any
more tumbling, or conjuring, or whatever it was, you’d bestwarn folk beforehand – and warn me. We’re a bit suspicious
round here of anything out of the way – uncanny, if youunderstand me; and we don’t take to it all of a sudden.’
‘I shan’t be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur,
I promise you. And now I think I’ll be getting to bed. Weshall be making an early start. Will you see that our poniesare ready by eight o’clock?’
‘Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with
you in private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come backto my mind that I ought to tell you. I hope that you’ll nottake it amiss. When I’ve seen to a thing or two, I’ll comealong to your room, if you’re willing.’
‘Certainly!’ said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered
how many private talks he would have before he got to bed,and what they would reveal. Were these people all in leagueagainst him? He began to suspect even old Butterbur’s fatface of concealing dark designs.
Chapter10
STRIDER
Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour.
There was no light. Merry was not there, and the ﬁre hadburned low. It was not until they had puffed up the embers
into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots that they
discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmlysitting in a chair by the door!
‘Hallo!’ said Pippin. ‘Who are you, and what do you want?’‘I am called Strider,’ he answered; ‘and though he may
have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk
with me.’
‘You said I might hear something to my advantage, I
believe,’ said Frodo. ‘What have you to say?’
‘Several things,’ answered Strider. ‘But, of course, I have
my price.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo sharply.
‘Don’t be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what
I know, and give you some good advice – but I shall want areward.’
‘And what will that be, pray?’ said Frodo. He suspected
now that he had fallen in with a rascal, and he thoughtuncomfortably that he had brought only a little money withhim. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he could notspare any of it.
‘No more than you can afford,’ answered Strider with a
slow smile, as if he guessed Frodo’s thoughts. ‘Just this: youmust take me along with you, until I wish to leave you.’
‘Oh, indeed!’ replied Frodo, surprised, but not much
relieved. ‘Even if I wanted another companion, I should not
agree to any such thing, until I knew a good deal more about
you, and your business.’
214 the fellowship of the ring
‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting
back comfortably. ‘You seem to be coming to your senses
again, and that is all to the good. You have been much toocareless so far. Very well! I will tell you what I know, andleave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, whenyou have heard me.’
‘Go on then!’ said Frodo. ‘What do you know?’
‘Too much; too many dark things,’ said Strider grimly.
‘But as for your business——’ He got up and went to thedoor, opened it quickly and looked out. Then he shut itquietly and sat down again. ‘I have quick ears,’ he went on,lowering his voice, ‘and though I cannot disappear, I havehunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoidbeing seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge this
evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits cameout of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said toold Bombadil or to one another; but one thing interested me.Please remember , said one of them, that the name Baggins must
not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must begiven. That interested me so much that I followed them here.
I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. Bagginshas an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so,I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.’
‘I don’t see what interest my name has for anyone in Bree,’
said Frodo angrily, ‘and I have still to learn why it interestsyou. Mr. Strider may have an honest reason for spying andeavesdropping; but if so, I should advise him to explain it.’
‘Well answered!’ said Strider laughing. ‘But the explanation
is simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. Iwanted to ﬁnd him quickly. I had learned that he was carryingout of the Shire, well, a secret that concerned me and myfriends.
‘Now, don’t mistake me!’ he cried, as Frodo rose from his
seat, and Sam jumped up with a scowl. ‘I shall take morecare of the secret than you do. And care is needed!’ He leanedforward and looked at them. ‘Watch every shadow!’ he saidin a low voice. ‘Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
strider 215
On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and
another appeared later, coming up the Greenway from the
south.’
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and
Sam: ‘I ought to have guessed it from the way the gatekeepergreeted us,’ he said. ‘And the landlord seems to have heard
something. Why did he press us to join the company? Andwhy on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to havestayed quiet in here.’
‘It would have been better,’ said Strider. ‘I would have
stopped your going into the common-room, if I could; butthe innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a
message.’
‘Do you think he——’ began Frodo.‘No, I don’t think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does
not altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.’ Frodogave him a puzzled look. ‘Well, I have rather a rascally look,have I not?’ said Strider with a curl of his lip and a queergleam in his eye. ‘But I hope we shall get to know one anotherbetter. When we do, I hope you will explain what happenedat the end of your song. For that little prank——’
‘It was sheer accident!’ interrupted Frodo.‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘Accident, then. That accident has
made your position dangerous.’
‘Hardly more than it was already,’ said Frodo. ‘I knew
these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate theyseem to have missed me and to have gone away.’
‘You must not count on that!’ said Strider sharply. ‘They
will return. And more are coming. There are others. I knowtheir number. I know these Riders.’ He paused, and his eyeswere cold and hard. ‘And there are some folk in Bree whoare not to be trusted,’ he went on. ‘Bill Ferny, for instance.He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call athis house. You must have noticed him among the company:a swarthy sneering fellow. He was very close with one of theSouthern strangers, and they slipped out together just after
216 the fellowship of the ring
your ‘‘accident’’. Not all of those Southerners mean well; and
as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make
mischief for amusement.’
‘What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do
with him?’ said Frodo, still determined not to understandStrider’s hints.
‘News of you, of course,’ answered Strider. ‘An account
of your performance would be very interesting to certain
people. After that they would hardly need to be told your realname. It seems to me only too likely that they will hear of itbefore this night is over. Is that enough? You can do as youlike about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I maysay that I know all the lands between the Shire and the MistyMountains, for I have wandered over them for many years.
I am older than I look. I might prove useful. You will haveto leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen willwatch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and beallowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won’t gofar. They will come on you in the wild, in some dark placewhere there is no help. Do you wish them to ﬁnd you? Theyare terrible!’
The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his
face was drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched thearms of his chair. The room was very quiet and still, and thelight seemed to have grown dim. For a while he sat withunseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening tosounds in the Night far away.
‘There!’ he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across
his brow. ‘Perhaps I know more about these pursuers thanyou do. You fear them, but you do not fear them enough,yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you can. Stridercan take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you havehim?’
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer; his
mind was confused with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, andlooked at his master; and at last he broke out:
‘With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I’d say no! This Strider here,
strider 217
he warns and he says take care; and I say yesto that, and let’s
begin with him. He comes out of the Wild, and I never heard
no good of such folk. He knows something, that’s plain, andmore than I like; but it’s no reason why we should let himgo leading us out into some dark place far from help, as heputs it.’
Pippin ﬁdgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not
reply to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo
caught his glance and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘Idon’t agree. I think, I think you are not really as you chooseto look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but yourvoice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don’t seewhy you should warn us to take care, and yet ask us to takeyou on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do you
really know about – about my business; and how do youknow it?’
‘The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider
with a grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering isanother. You will never get to Rivendell now on your own,and to trust me is your only chance. You must make up yourmind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will helpyou to do so. But why should you believe my story, if youdo not trust me already? Still here it is——’
At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr.
Butterbur had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob
with cans of hot water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner.
‘I’ve come to bid you good night,’ said the landlord, putting
the candles on the table. ‘Nob! Take the water to the rooms!’
He came in and shut the door.
‘It’s like this,’ he began, hesitating and looking troubled. ‘If
I’ve done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drivesout another, as you’ll admit; and I’m a busy man. But ﬁrst onething and then another this week have jogged my memory, asthe saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, I was askedto look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the nameof Baggins in particular.’
218 the fellowship of the ring
‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo.
‘Ah! you know best,’ said the landlord, knowingly. ‘I won’t
give you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be
going by the name of Underhill, and I was given a descriptionthat ﬁts you well enough, if I may say so.’
‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely inter-
rupting.
‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks ,’ said Mr. Butterbur
solemnly. Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘ That
won’t help you much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley , he says to
me,’ continued Mr. Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘ But
this one is taller than some and fairer than most, and he has a
cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your
pardon, but he said it, not me.’
‘Hesaid it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly.
‘Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard
they say he is, but he’s a good friend of mine, whether or no.
But now I don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I seehim again: turn all my ale sour or me into a block of wood, Ishouldn’t wonder. He’s a bit hasty. Still what’s done can’t beundone.’
‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient
with the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts.
‘Where was I?’ said the landlord, pausing and snapping his
ﬁngers. ‘Ah, yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walkedright into my room without a knock. Barley , he says, I’m off
in the morning. Will you do something for me? You’ve only toname it , I said. I’m in a hurry , said he, and I’ve no time myself,
but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you anyone youcan send, and trust to go? I can ﬁnd someone , I said, tomorrow,
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow , he says, and then
he gave me a letter.
‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, pro-
ducing a letter from his pocket, and reading out theaddress slowly and proudly (he valued his reputation as alettered man):
strider 219
Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON
in the SHIRE.
‘A letter for me from Gandalf!’ cried Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘Then your right name is
Baggins?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter
at once, and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you
came to tell me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long timeto come to the point.’
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. ‘You’re right, master,’
he said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid ofwhat Gandalf will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep
it back a-purpose. I put it by safe. Then I couldn’t ﬁndnobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day after,and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thingafter another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy man. I’lldo what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help Ican give, you’ve only to name it.
‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less.
Barley , he says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may
be coming out this way before long, him and another. He’ll becalling himself Underhill. Mind that! But you need ask noquestions. And if I’m not with him, he may be in trouble, and hemay need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I’ll be grateful ,
he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off,seemingly.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.‘These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice.
‘They’re looking for Baggins , and if they mean well, then I’m
a hobbit. It was on Monday, and all the dogs were yammeringand the geese screaming. Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he cameand told me that two black men were at the door asking fora hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was all stood on end. Ibid the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them;but they’ve been asking the same question all the way toArchet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking
220 the fellowship of the ring
questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d
had bite or sup, he did.’
‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the
light. ‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had
let him in, Barliman.’
The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried.
‘You’re always popping up. What do you want now?’
‘He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer
me his help.’
‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr.
Butterbur, looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in
your plight, I wouldn’t take up with a Ranger.’
‘Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat
innkeeper who only remembers his own name because people
shout it at him all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for
ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long road beforethem. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?’
‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said
Mr. Butterbur, looking really scared. ‘But why can’t you stayhere quiet for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queergoings on? What are these black men after, and where dothey come from, I’d like to know?’
‘I’m sorry I can’t explain it all,’ answered Frodo. ‘I am tired
and very worried, and it’s a long tale. But if you mean to helpme, I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long asI am in your house. These Black Riders: I am not sure, butI think, I fear they come from——’
‘They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice.
‘From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’
‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evi-
dently was known to him. ‘That is the worst news that hascome to Bree in my time.’
‘It is,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’‘I am,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I
don’t know what the likes of me can do against, against——’he faltered.
‘Against the Shadow in the East,’ said Strider quietly. ‘Not
strider 221
much, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr.
Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can
forget the name of Baggins, till he is far away.’
‘I’ll do that,’ said Butterbur. ‘But they’ll ﬁnd out he’s here
without help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Bagginsdrew attention to himself this evening, to say no more. Thestory of that Mr. Bilbo’s going off has been heard before
tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessingin his slow pate; and there are others in Bree quicker in theuptake than he is.’
‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’
said Frodo.
‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no
spooks, they won’t get in The Pony so easy. Don’t you worry
till the morning. Nob’ll say no word. No black man shall pass
my doors, while I can stand on my legs. Me and my folk’ll keepwatch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you can.’
‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We
must get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.’
‘Right! I’ll see to the orders,’ said the landlord. ‘Good night,
Mr. Baggins – Underhill, I should say! Good night – now,bless me! Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had
forgotten all about Merry, and it was getting late. ‘I am afraidhe is out. He said something about going for a breath of air.’
‘Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party
might be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and barthe doors quick, but I’ll see your friend is let in when hecomes. I’d better send Nob to look for him. Good night toyou all!’ At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another doubt-ful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footstepsretreated down the passage.
‘Well?’ said Strider. ‘When are you going to open that letter?’
Frodo looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemedcertainly to be Gandalf’s. Inside, written in the wizard’sstrong but graceful script, was the following message:
222 the fellowship of the ring
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear’s Day, Shire Year,
1418 .
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had
better leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end
of July at latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will followyou, if I ﬁnd that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, ifyou pass through Bree. You can trust the landlord (Butterbur).You may meet a friend of mine on the Road: a Man, lean, dark,tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business and will helpyou. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If Ido not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do
not travel by night!
PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many
strange men on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy
man, but his memory is like a lumber-
room: thing wanted always buried.
If he forgets, I shall roast him.
Fare Well!
strider 223
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to
Pippin and Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of
things!’ he said. ‘He deserves roasting. If I had got this atonce, we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now. Butwhat can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he wasgoing into great danger.’
‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider.
Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering
about Gandalf’s second postscript. ‘Why didn’t you tell methat you were Gandalf’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It wouldhave saved time.’
‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’
said Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew Ihad to persuade you to trust me without proofs, if I was to
help you. In any case, I did not intend to tell you all aboutmyself at once. I had to study youﬁrst, and make sure
of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. Assoon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell youwhatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with aqueer laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for myown sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust andlongs for friendship. But there, I believe my looks are againstme.’
‘They are – at ﬁrst sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with
sudden relief after reading Gandalf’s letter. ‘But handsomeis as handsome does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresaywe shall all look much the same after lying for days in hedgesand ditches.’
‘It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of
wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ heanswered. ‘And you would die ﬁrst, unless you are made ofsterner stuff than you look to be.’
Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still
eyed Strider dubiously. ‘How do we know you are the Striderthat Gandalf speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never men-tioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You might be aplay-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with
224 the fellowship of the ring
you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his
clothes. What have you to say to that?’
‘That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am
afraid my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had
killed the real Strider, I could kill you. And I should havekilled you already without so much talk. If I was after theRing, I could have it – now !’
He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his
eyes gleamed a light, keen and commanding. Throwing back
his cloak, he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that hadhung concealed by his side. They did not dare to move. Samsat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.
‘But I amthe real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking
down at them with his face softened by a sudden smile. ‘I am
Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can saveyou, I will.’
There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesita-
tion. ‘I believed that you were a friend before the letter came,’he said, ‘or at least I wished to. You have frightened meseveral times tonight, but never in the way that servants ofthe Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of his spieswould – well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.’
‘I see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it?
All that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost. ’
‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could
not make out what they were about. But how did you knowthat they were in Gandalf’s letter, if you have never seen it?’
‘I did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and
those verses go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, andthey saw that the blade was indeed broken a foot below thehilt. ‘Not much use is it, Sam?’ said Strider. ‘But the time isnear when it shall be forged anew.’
Sam said nothing.‘Well,’ said Strider, ‘with Sam’s permission we will call that
settled. Strider shall be your guide. And now I think it is timeyou went to bed and took what rest you can. We shall have
strider 225
a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree
unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed.
But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one ortwo ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If oncewe shake off the pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.’
‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way
from here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round;
and there we shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalfwill make for that point, if he follows us. After Weathertopour journey will become more difﬁcult, and we shall have tochoose between various dangers.’
‘When did you last see Gandalf?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you
know where he is, or what he is doing?’
Strider looked grave. ‘I do not know,’ he said. ‘I came west
with him in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders
of the Shire in the last few years, when he was busy elsewhere.He seldom left it unguarded. We last met on the ﬁrst of May:at Sarn Ford down the Brandywine. He told me that hisbusiness with you had gone well, and that you would bestarting for Rivendell in the last week of September. As Iknew he was at your side, I went away on a journey of myown. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reachedhim, and I was not at hand to help.
‘I am troubled, for the ﬁrst time since I have known him.
We should have had messages, even if he could not comehimself. When I returned, many days ago, I heard the illnews. The tidings had gone far and wide that Gandalfwas missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was theElven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later they told methat you had left your home; but there was no news of yourleaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Roadanxiously.’
‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with
it – with Gandalf’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I do not know of anything else that could have hindered
him, except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. ‘But do not
226 the fellowship of the ring
give up hope! Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know –
as a rule you can only see his jokes and toys. But this business
of ours will be his greatest task.’
Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired.
In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, orsleep where I sit. Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It wouldbe the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for
him.’
At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came
running along the passage. Merry came in with a rush fol-lowed by Nob. He shut the door hastily, and leaned againstit. He was out of breath. They stared at him in alarm for amoment before he gasped: ‘I have seen them, Frodo! I have
seen them! Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’‘Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as
you did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had comeback again and was standing just outside the light of thelamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt thatsomething horrible was creeping near: there was a sort ofdeeper shade among the shadows across the road, just beyondthe edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once into the darkwithout a sound. There was no horse.’
‘Which way did it go?’ asked Strider, suddenly and sharply.Merry started, noticing the stranger for the ﬁrst time. ‘Go
on!’ said Frodo. ‘This is a friend of Gandalf’s. I will explainlater.’
‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued
Merry. ‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost atonce; but I went round the corner and on as far as the lasthouse on the Road.’
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout
heart,’ he said; ‘but it was foolish.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Merry. ‘Neither brave nor silly, I think.
I could hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow.Anyway, I went, and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge.
strider 227
One was muttering; and the other was whispering, or hissing.
I couldn’t hear a word that was said. I did not creep any
closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terri-ﬁed, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home,when something came behind me and I . . . I fell over.’
‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out
with a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up
towards South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought Icould see something in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, butit looked to me as if two men was stooping over something,lifting it. I gave a shout, but when I got up to the spot therewas no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by theroadside. He seemed to be asleep. ‘‘I thought I had fallen intodeep water,’’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very queer
he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ranback here like a hare.’
‘I am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know
what I said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember.I went to pieces. I don’t know what came over me.’
‘I do,’ said Strider. ‘The Black Breath. The Riders must
have left their horses outside, and passed back through theSouth-gate in secret. They will know all the news now, forthey have visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southernerwas a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, beforewe leave Bree.’
‘What will happen?’ said Merry. ‘Will they attack the inn?’‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. ‘They are not all here yet.
And in any case that is not their way. In dark and lonelinessthey are strongest; they will not openly attack a house wherethere are lights and many people – not until they are des-perate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie beforeus. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree arein their clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evilwork: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe, thegatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate onMonday. I was watching them. He was white and shakingwhen they left him.’
228 the fellowship of the ring
‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What
are we to do?’
‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to
have found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have
windows looking north and close to the ground. We will allremain together and bar this window and the door. But ﬁrstNob and I will fetch your luggage.’
While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account
of all that had happened since supper. Merry was still read-
ing and pondering Gandalf’s letter when Strider and Nobreturned.
‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve rufﬂed up the clothes and
put in a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made anice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr.
Bag – Underhill, sir,’ he added with a grin.
Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will
happen when they have penetrated the disguise?’
‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort
till morning.’
‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his
part in the watch on the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-ﬂoor. They
pushed a low chair against the door and shut the window.Peering out, Frodo saw that the night was still clear. TheSickle *was swinging bright above the shoulders of Bree-hill.
He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drewthe curtains together. Strider built up the ﬁre and blew outall the candles.
The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet
towards the hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chairagainst the door. They talked for a little, for Merry still hadseveral questions to ask.
‘Jumped over the Moon!’ chuckled Merry as he rolled him-
self in his blanket. ‘Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish
*The Hobbits’ name for the Plough or Great Bear.
strider 229
I had been there to see. The worthies of Bree will be dis-
cussing it a hundred years hence.’
‘I hope so,’ said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one
by one the hobbits dropped off to sleep.
Chapter11
A KNIFE IN THE DARK
As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank.The house at Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened
the door cautiously and peered out. A feeling of fear had
been growing on him all day, and he was unable to rest or goto bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air.As he stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved underthe trees; the gate seemed to open of its own accord and close
again without a sound. Terror seized him. He shrank back,and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall. Then heshut and locked the door.
The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses
led with stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped,and three black ﬁgures entered, like shades of night creeping
across the ground. One went to the door, one to the cornerof the house on either side; and there they stood, as still asthe shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The houseand the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly.
There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far
away. The cold hour before dawn was passing. The ﬁgureby the door moved. In the dark without moon or stars adrawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had been unsheathed.There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered.
‘Open, in the name of Mordor!’ said a voice thin and
menacing.
At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with
timbers burst and lock broken. The black ﬁgures passedswiftly in.
At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out.
It rent the night like ﬁre on a hill-top.
a knife in the dark 231
awake! fear! fir e! foes! awake!
Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark
shapes creep from the garden, he knew that he must run for
it, or perish. And run he did, out of the back door, through
the garden, and over the ﬁelds. When he reached the nearesthouse, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the doorstep.‘No, no, no!’ he was crying. ‘No, not me! I haven’t got it!’ Itwas some time before anyone could make out what he wasbabbling about. At last they got the idea that enemies werein Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest. Andthen they lost no more time.
fear! fire! foes!
The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland,
that had not been sounded for a hundred years, not since the
white wolves came in the Fell Winter, when the Brandywinewas frozen over.
awake! awake!
Far away answering horns were heard. The alarm was
spreading.
The black ﬁgures ﬂed from the house. One of them let fall
a hobbit-cloak on the step, as he ran. In the lane the noise ofhoofs broke out, and gathering to a gallop, went hammeringaway into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there was thesound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running.But the Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Letthe little people blow! Sauron would deal with them later.Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew now that thehouse was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode downthe guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.
***
232 the fellowship of the ring
In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly,
as if some sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that
Strider was sitting alert in his chair: his eyes gleamed in thelight of the ﬁre, which had been tended and was burningbrightly; but he made no sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again
troubled with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The
wind seemed to be curling round the house and shaking it;and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. He opened hiseyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard. Striderhad drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with aclang. The ﬁrst grey light of day was in the room, and a coldair was coming through the open window.
As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to
their bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that
they had taken his advice: the windows had been forced openand were swinging, and the curtains were ﬂapping; the bedswere tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and ﬂung uponthe ﬂoor; the brown mat was torn to pieces.
Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr.
Butterbur looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closedhis eyes all night (so he said), but he had never heard a sound.
‘Never has such a thing happened in my time!’ he cried,
raising his hands in horror. ‘Guests unable to sleep in theirbeds, and good bolsters ruined and all! What are we comingto?’
‘Dark times,’ said Strider. ‘But for the present you may be
left in peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave atonce. Never mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standingwill have to do. We shall be packed in a few minutes.’
Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got
ready, and to fetch them a ‘bite’. But very soon he came backin dismay. The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors hadall been opened in the night, and they were gone: not onlyMerry’s ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place.
Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to
reach Rivendell on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They
a knife in the dark 233
might as well set out for the Moon. Strider sat silent for a
while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was weighing up their
strength and courage.
‘Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,’ he said at
last, thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind.‘We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roadsthat I mean to take. I was going to walk in any case. It is the
food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count on gettinganything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what wetake with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for wemay be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of thedirect way. How much are you prepared to carry on yourbacks?’
‘As much as we must,’ said Pippin with a sinking heart,
but trying to show that he was tougher than he looked (or
felt).
‘I can carry enough for two,’ said Sam deﬁantly.‘Can’t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?’ asked Frodo.
‘Can’t we get a couple of ponies in the village, or even onejust for the baggage? I don’t suppose we could hire them,but we might be able to buy them,’ he added, doubtfully,wondering if he could afford it.
‘I doubt it,’ said the landlord unhappily. ‘The two or three
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard,and they’re gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies fordraught or what not, there are very few of them in Bree, andthey won’t be for sale. But I’ll do what I can. I’ll rout out Boband send him round as soon as may be.’
‘Yes,’ said Strider reluctantly, ‘you had better do that. I am
afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But soends all hope of starting early, and slipping away quietly! Wemight as well have blown a horn to announce our departure.That was part of their plan, no doubt.’
‘There is one crumb of comfort,’ said Merry, ‘and more
than a crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait –and sit down to it. Let’s get hold of Nob!’
***
234 the fellowship of the ring
In the end there was more than three hours’ delay. Bob
came back with the report that no horse or pony was to be
got for love or money in the neighbourhood – except one:Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. ‘A poor oldhalf-starved creature it is,’ said Bob; ‘but he won’t part withit for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you’re placed, notif I knows Bill Ferny.’
‘Bill Ferny?’ said Frodo. ‘Isn’t there some trick? Wouldn’t
the beast bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking
us, or something?’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘But I cannot imagine any animal
running home to him, once it got away. I fancy this is onlyan afterthought of kind Master Ferny’s: just a way of increas-ing his proﬁts from the affair. The chief danger is that the
poor beast is probably at death’s door. But there does notseem any choice. What does he want for it?’
Bill Ferny’s price was twelve silver pennies; and that was
indeed at least three times the pony’s value in those parts. Itproved to be a bony, underfed, and dispirited animal; butit did not look like dying just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for ithimself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence as somecompensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man,and well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silverpennies was a sore blow to him, and being cheated by BillFerny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the
end. It turned out later that only one horse had been actuallystolen. The others had been driven off, or had bolted interror, and were found wandering in different corners ofthe Bree-land. Merry’s ponies had escaped altogether, andeventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their wayto the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they cameunder the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom’s ears,he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got ﬁve good beastsat a very fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, butBob treated them well; so on the whole they were lucky: they
a knife in the dark 235
missed a dark and dangerous journey. But they never came
to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his
money was gone for good, or for bad. And he had other
troubles. For there was a great commotion as soon as theremaining guests were astir and heard news of the raid onthe inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and
blamed the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that oneof their own number had also disappeared in the night, noneother than Bill Ferny’s squint-eyed companion. Suspicion fellon him at once.
‘If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my
house,’ said Butterbur angrily, ‘you ought to pay for all thedamage yourselves and not come shouting at me. Go and ask
Ferny where your handsome friend is!’ But it appeared thathe was nobody’s friend, and nobody could recollect when hehad joined their party.
After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get
together further supplies for the longer journey they werenow expecting. It was close on ten o’clock before they at lastgot off. By that time the whole of Bree was buzzing withexcitement. Frodo’s vanishing trick; the appearance of theblack horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not leastthe news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterioushobbits, made such a tale as would last for many uneventful
years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and many
even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road tosee the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were atthe doors or hanging out of the windows.
Strider had changed his mind, and had decided to leave
Bree by the main road. Any attempt to set off across countryat once would only make matters worse: half the inhabitantswould follow them, to see what they were up to, and toprevent them from trespassing.
They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr.
Butterbur with many thanks. ‘I hope we shall meet again
236 the fellowship of the ring
some day, when things are merry once more,’ said Frodo. ‘I
should like nothing better than to stay in your house in peace
for a while.’
They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the
eyes of the crowd. Not all the faces were friendly, nor all thewords that were shouted. But Strider seemed to be held inawe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that he stared at
shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front withFrodo; next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Samleading the pony, which was laden with as much of theirbaggage as they had the heart to give it; but already it lookedless dejected, as if it approved of the change in its fortunes.Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket fullof them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. ‘Apples for
walking, and a pipe for sitting,’ he said. ‘But I reckon I’ll missthem both before long.’
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that
peeped out of doors, or popped over walls and fences, asthey passed. But as they drew near to the further gate, Frodosaw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick hedge: the last housein the village. In one of the windows he caught a glimpse ofa sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.
‘So that’s where that southerner is hiding!’ he thought. ‘He
looks more than half like a goblin.’
Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had
heavy black brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouthcurled in a sneer. He was smoking a short black pipe. As theyapproached he took it out of his mouth and spat.
‘Morning, Longshanks!’ he said. ‘Off early? Found some
friends at last?’ Strider nodded, but did not answer.
‘Morning, my little friends!’ he said to the others. ‘I sup-
pose you know who you’ve taken up with? That’s Stick-at-naught Strider, that is! Though I’ve heard other names notso pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don’t goill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!’ He spat again.
Sam turned quickly. ‘And you, Ferny,’ he said, ‘put your
ugly face out of sight, or it will get hurt.’ With a sudden ﬂick,
a knife in the dark 237
quick as lightning, an apple left his hand and hit Bill square
on the nose. He ducked too late, and curses came from
behind the hedge. ‘Waste of a good apple,’ said Sam regret-fully, and strode on.
At last they left the village behind. The escort of children
and stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned
back at the South-gate. Passing through, they kept on alongthe Road for some miles. It bent to the left, curving back intoits eastward line as it rounded the feet of Bree-hill, and thenit began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country. Totheir left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holesof Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill;
down in a deep hollow away north of the Road there werewisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay; Archetwas hidden in the trees beyond.
After the Road had run down some way, and had left
Bree-hill standing tall and brown behind, they came on anarrow track that led off towards the North. ‘This is wherewe leave the open and take to cover,’ said Strider.
‘Not a ‘‘short cut’’, I hope,’ said Pippin. ‘Our last short cut
through woods nearly ended in disaster.’
‘Ah, but you had not got me with you then,’ laughed
Strider. ‘My cuts, short or long, don’t go wrong.’ He took alook up and down the Road. No one was in sight; and he ledthe way quickly down towards the wooded valley.
His plan, as far as they could understand it without know-
ing the country, was to go towards Archet at ﬁrst, but to bearright and pass it on the east, and then to steer as straight ashe could over the wild lands to Weathertop Hill. In that waythey would, if all went well, cut off a great loop of the Road,which further on bent southwards to avoid the MidgewaterMarshes. But, of course, they would have to pass throughthe marshes themselves, and Strider’s description of themwas not encouraging.
However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant.
Indeed, if it had not been for the disturbing events of the
238 the fellowship of the ring
night before, they would have enjoyed this part of the journey
better than any up to that time. The sun was shining, clear
but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy andfull of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Striderguided them conﬁdently among the many crossing paths,although left to themselves they would soon have been at aloss. He was taking a wandering course with many turns and
doublings, to put off any pursuit.
‘Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for
certain,’ he said; ‘though I don’t think he will follow us him-self. He knows the land round here well enough, but he knowshe is not a match for me in a wood. It is what he may tellothers that I am afraid of. I don’t suppose they are far away.If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.’
Whether because of Strider’s skill or for some other reason,
they saw no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing
all that day: neither two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed,except one fox and a few squirrels. The next day they beganto steer a steady course eastwards; and still all was quiet andpeaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came out of theChetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since theyturned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide ﬂatexpanse of country, much more difﬁcult to manage. They werefar beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out in the pathlesswilderness, and drawing near to the Midgewater Marshes.
The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and
here and there they came upon pools, and wide stretches ofreeds and rushes ﬁlled with the warbling of little hidden birds.They had to pick their way carefully to keep both dry-footedand on their proper course. At ﬁrst they made fair progress,but as they went on, their passage became slower and moredangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous,and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers to ﬁndthrough their shifting quagmires. The ﬂies began to tormentthem, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that creptup their sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
a knife in the dark 239
‘I am being eaten alive!’ cried Pippin. ‘Midgewater! There
are more midges than water!’
‘What do they live on when they can’t get hobbit?’ asked
Sam, scratching his neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant
country. Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncom-
fortable; and the biting insects would not let them sleep.
There were also abominable creatures haunting the reeds andtussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of thecricket. There were thousands of them, and they squeaked allround, neek-breek ,breek-neek , unceasingly all the night, until
the hobbits were nearly frantic.
The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night
almost as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam
called them) had been left behind, the midges still pursuedthem.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed
to him that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: itﬂashed and faded many times. It was not the dawn, for thatwas still some hours off.
‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and
was standing, gazing ahead into the night.
‘I do not know,’ Strider answered. ‘It is too distant to make
out. It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still
see the white ﬂashes, and against them the tall dark ﬁgure ofStrider, standing silent and watchful. At last he passed intouneasy sleep.
They had not gone far on the ﬁfth day when they left the
last straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behindthem. The land before them began steadily to rise again.Away in the distance eastward they could now see a line ofhills. The highest of them was at the right of the line and alittle separated from the others. It had a conical top, slightlyﬂattened at the summit.
‘That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. ‘The Old Road, which
240 the fellowship of the ring
we have left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and
passes not far from its foot. We might reach it by noon
tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I suppose we hadbetter do so.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we
shall ﬁnd. It is close to the Road.’
‘But surely we were hoping to ﬁnd Gandalf there?’
‘Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he
may not pass through Bree, and so he may not know whatwe are doing. And anyway, unless by luck we arrive almosttogether, we shall miss one another; it will not be safe for himor for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to ﬁnd us inthe wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop them-
selves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there aremany birds and beasts in this country that could see us, aswe stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to betrusted, and there are other spies more evil than they are.’
The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam
looked up into the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagleshovering over them with bright unfriendly eyes. ‘You domake me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!’ he said.
‘What do you advise us to do?’ asked Frodo.‘I think,’ answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite
sure, ‘I think the best thing is to go as straight eastward fromhere as we can, to make for the line of hills, not forWeathertop. There we can strike a path I know that runs attheir feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north andless openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.’
All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early
evening came down. The land became drier and more barren;but mists and vapours lay behind them on the marshes. Afew melancholy birds were piping and wailing, until the roundred sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an emptysilence fell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunsetglancing through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away.
a knife in the dark 241
At the day’s end they came to a stream that wandered
down from the hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland,
and they went up along its banks while the light lasted. It wasalready night when at last they halted and made their campunder some stunted alder-trees by the shores of the stream.Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak andtreeless backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and
Strider, it seemed, did not sleep at all. The moon was waxing,and in the early night-hours a cold grey light lay on the land.
Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There
was a frost in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. Thehobbits felt refreshed, as if they had had a night of unbrokensleep. Already they were getting used to much walking onshort commons – shorter at any rate than what in the Shire
they would have thought barely enough to keep them on theirlegs. Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbitthat he had been.
‘Very odd,’ said Frodo, tightening his belt, ‘considering
that there is actually a good deal less of me. I hope thethinning process will not go on indeﬁnitely, or I shall becomea wraith.’
‘Do not speak of such things!’ said Strider quickly, and
with surprising earnestness.
The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge,
often rising almost to a thousand feet, and here and there
falling again to low clefts or passes leading into the eastern
land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge the hobbits couldsee what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls anddikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins of old worksof stone. By night they had reached the feet of the westwardslopes, and there they camped. It was the night of the ﬁfthof October, and they were six days out from Bree.
In the morning they found, for the ﬁrst time since they had
left the Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned rightand followed it southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a linethat seemed chosen so as to keep as much hidden as possible
242 the fellowship of the ring
from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of the ﬂats to
the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and
where it passed over ﬂatter and more open ground on eitherside of it there were lines of large boulders and hewn stonesthat screened the travellers almost like a hedge.
‘I wonder who made this path, and what for,’ said Merry,
as they walked along one of these avenues, where the stones
were unusually large and closely set. ‘I am not sure that I likeit: it has a – well, rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there anybarrow on Weathertop?’
‘No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of
these hills,’ answered Strider. ‘The Men of the West did notlive here; though in their latter days they defended the hillsfor a while against the evil that came out of Angmar. This
path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But longbefore, in the ﬁrst days of the North Kingdom, they built agreat watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Su ˆl they called it.
It was burned and broken, and nothing remains of it now buta tumbled ring, like a rough crown on the old hill’s head. Yetonce it was tall and fair. It is told that Elendil stood therewatching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in thedays of the Last Alliance.’
The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned
in old lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. ‘Who wasGil-galad?’ asked Merry; but Strider did not answer, andseemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low voicemurmured:
Gil-galad was an Elven-king.Of him the harpers sadly sing:the last whose realm was fair and freebetween the Mountains and the Sea.
His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;the countless stars of heaven’s ﬁeldwere mirrored in his silver shield.
a knife in the dark 243
But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his starin Mordor where the shadows are.
The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam’s.
‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry.‘That’s all I know,’ stammered Sam, blushing. ‘I learned it
from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me taleslike that, knowing how I was always one for hearing aboutElves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters. He wasmighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrotepoetry . He wrote what I have just said.’
‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay
that is called The Fall of Gil-galad , which is in an ancient
tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.’
‘There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I
didn’t learn that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought
I should be going that way myself!’
‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to
that!’
‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider.
It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern
end of the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light
of the October sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a
bridge on to the northward slope of the hill. They decided
to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad.Concealment was no longer possible, and they could onlyhope that no enemy or spy was observing them. Nothing wasto be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf was anywhere about,there was no sign of him.
On the western ﬂank of Weathertop they found a sheltered
hollow, at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dellwith grassy sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with thepony and their packs and luggage. The other three went on.After half an hour’s plodding climb Strider reached the crown
244 the fellowship of the ring
of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless.
The last slope had been steep and rocky.
On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of
ancient stone-work, now crumbling or covered with age-long
grass. But in the centre a cairn of broken stones had beenpiled. They were blackened as if with ﬁre. About them theturf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the grass
was scorched and shrivelled, as if ﬂames had swept the hill-top; but there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all
round below them a wide prospect, for the most part of landsempty and featureless, except for patches of woodland awayto the south, beyond which they caught here and there theglint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern side
there ran like a ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the Westand winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge ofdark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it. Followingits line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains: thenearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stoodtaller shapes of grey, and behind those again were high whitepeaks glimmering among the clouds.
‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and
uninviting it looks! There is no water and no shelter. And nosign of Gandalf. But I don’t blame him for not waiting – ifhe ever came here.’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. ‘Even
if he was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could havearrived here ﬁrst. He can ride very swiftly when need presses.’Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone on the top ofthe cairn; it was ﬂatter than the others, and whiter, as if ithad escaped the ﬁre. He picked it up and examined it, turningit in his ﬁngers. ‘This has been handled recently,’ he said.‘What do you think of these marks?’
On the ﬂat under-side Frodo saw some scratches:
.
‘There seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’
he said.
‘The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin
a knife in the dark 245
branches,’ said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf,
though one cannot be sure. The scratches are ﬁne, and they
certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean somethingquite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers userunes, and they come here sometimes.’
‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’
asked Merry.
‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G 3,
and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third:
that is three days ago now. It would also show that he was ina hurry and danger was at hand, so that he had no time ordid not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is so,we must be wary.’
‘I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever
they may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to
know that he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was
here, and was in danger. There have been scorching ﬂameshere; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in theeastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that he wasattacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell.He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselvesand make our own way to Rivendell, as best we can.’
‘How far is Rivendell?’ asked Merry, gazing round wearily.
The world looked wild and wide from Weathertop.
‘I don’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles
beyond the Forsaken Inn , a day’s journey east of Bree,’
answered Strider. ‘Some say it is so far, and some say other-wise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad to reach theirjourney’s end, whether the time is long or short. But I knowhow long it would take me on my own feet, with fair weatherand no ill fortune: twelve days from here to the Ford ofBruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that runsout of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight’s journey beforeus, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’
‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’‘It may,’ said Strider.
246 the fellowship of the ring
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its south-
ward edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the ﬁrst time fully
realized his homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly thathis fortune had left him in the quiet and beloved Shire. Hestared down at the hateful Road, leading back westward – tohis home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks weremoving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again
he saw that three others were creeping eastward to meetthem. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm.
‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards.At once Strider ﬂung himself on the ground behind the
ruined circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threwhimself alongside.
‘What is it?’ he whispered.
‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider.Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and
peered through a cleft between two jagged stones. The lightwas no longer bright, for the clear morning had faded, andclouds creeping out of the East had now overtaken the sun,as it began to go down. They could all see the black specks,but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes forcertain; yet something told them that there, far below, wereBlack Riders assembling on the Road beyond the foot of thehill.
‘Yes,’ said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt.
‘The enemy is here!’
Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side
of the hill to ﬁnd their companions.
Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored
the small dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away theyfound a spring of clear water in the hillside, and near itfootprints not more than a day or two old. In the dell itselfthey found recent traces of a ﬁre, and other signs of a hastycamp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dellnearest to the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small storeof ﬁrewood neatly stacked.
a knife in the dark 247
‘I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,’ he said to Pippin.
‘Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it
seems.’
Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. ‘I wish I
had waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ hesaid, hurrying off to the spring to examine the footprints.
‘It is just as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam
and Pippin have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are
spoilt or confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is theywho left the ﬁrewood behind. But there are also several newertracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one set wasmade, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. Icannot now be certain, but I think there were many bootedfeet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought.
Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked
and booted Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell,
the sooner Strider led them somewhere else the better. Samviewed the hollow with great dislike, now that he had heardnews of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles away.
‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked
impatiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: itmakes my heart sink somehow.’
‘Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’
answered Strider, looking up and considering the time andthe weather. ‘Well, Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like thisplace either; but I cannot think of anywhere better that wecould reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight forthe moment, and if we moved we should be much more likelyto be seen by spies. All we could do would be to go right outof our way back north on this side of the line of hills, wherethe land is all much the same as it is here. The Road iswatched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to takecover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side ofthe Road beyond the hills the country is bare and ﬂat formiles.’
‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem
usually to have used their noses rather than their eyes,
248 the fellowship of the ring
smelling for us, if smelling is the right word, at least in the
daylight. But you made us lie down ﬂat when you saw them
down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.’
‘I was too careless on the hill-top,’ answered Strider. ‘I was
very anxious to ﬁnd some sign of Gandalf; but it was amistake for three of us to go up and stand there so long. Forthe black horses can see, and the Riders can use men and
other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They themselvesdo not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes castshadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys;and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that arehidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at alltimes they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hatingit. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We can
feel their presence – it troubled our hearts, as soon as wecame here, and before we saw them; they feel ours morekeenly. Also,’ he added, and his voice sank to a whisper, ‘theRing draws them.’
‘Is there no escape then?’ said Frodo, looking round wildly.
‘If I move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall drawthem to me!’
Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. ‘There is still hope,’ he
said. ‘You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set readyfor the ﬁre as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, butﬁre shall serve for both. Sauron can put ﬁre to his evil uses, ashe can all things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear thosewho wield it. Fire is our friend in the wilderness.’
‘Maybe,’ muttered Sam. ‘It is also as good a way of saying
‘‘here we are’’ as I can think of, bar shouting.’
Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell
they lit a ﬁre, and prepared a meal. The shades of eveningbegan to fall, and it grew cold. They were suddenly awareof great hunger, for they had not eaten anything since break-fast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts,unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world.
a knife in the dark 249
Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few
and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of evil sort:
trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleysof the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellersbe found, most often dwarves, hurrying along on business oftheir own, and with no help and few words to spare forstrangers.
‘I don’t see how our food can be made to last,’ said Frodo.
‘We have been careful enough in the last few days, and this
supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, ifwe have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.’
‘There is food in the wild,’ said Strider; ‘berry, root, and
herb; and I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need notbe afraid of starving before winter comes. But gathering and
catching food is long and weary work, and we need haste. Sotighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables ofElrond’s house!’
The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from
the edge of the dell they could see nothing but a grey landnow vanishing quickly into shadow. The sky above hadcleared again and was slowly ﬁlled with twinkling stars. Frodoand his companions huddled round the ﬁre, wrapped in everygarment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was contentwith a single cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfullyat his pipe.
As night fell and the light of the ﬁre began to shine out
brightly he began to tell them tales to keep their minds fromfear. He knew many histories and legends of long ago, ofElves and Men and the good and evil deeds of the ElderDays. They wondered how old he was, and where he hadlearned all this lore.
‘Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he
paused at the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do youknow any more of that old lay that you spoke of?’
‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it
concerns us closely.’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, whowas staring into the ﬁre.
250 the fellowship of the ring
‘I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,’ said Frodo
slowly. ‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of
Middle-earth. Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With
Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land of——’
‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale
should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand.If we win through to the house of Elrond, you may hear it
there, told in full.’
‘Then tell us some other tale of the old days,’ begged Sam;
‘a tale about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearlylike to hear more about Elves; the dark seems to press roundso close.’
‘I will tell you the tale of Tinu ´viel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief –
for it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there
are none now, except Elrond, that remember it aright as itwas told of old. It is a fair tale, though it is sad, as are all thetales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift up your hearts.’ Hewas silent for some time, and then he began not to speak butto chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tinu´viel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wonder ﬂowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.
a knife in the dark 251
Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and ﬂeet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She lightly ﬂed on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the ﬂying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.
When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,
And melting water bubbling.
He saw the elven-ﬂowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.
252 the fellowship of the ring
Again she ﬂed, but swift he came.
Tinu´viel! Tinu ´viel!
He called her by her Elvish name;
And there she halted listening.
One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,
And doom fell on Tinu ´viel
That in his arms lay glistening.
As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,
The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tinu´viel the elven-fair,
Immortal maiden elven-wise,
About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.
Long was the way that fate them bore,
O’er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ‘That is
a song,’ he said, ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath
among the Elves, but is hard to render in our Common
Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells of themeeting of Beren son of Barahir and Lu ´thien Tinu ´viel. Beren
was a mortal man, but Lu ´thien was the daughter of Thingol,
a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the world wasyoung; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever beenamong all the children of this world. As the stars above themists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her
a knife in the dark 253
face was a shining light. In those days the Great Enemy,
of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant, dwelt in
Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West comingback to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain theSilmarils which he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aidedthe Elves. But the Enemy was victorious and Barahir wasslain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over the
Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol inthe forest of Neldoreth. There he beheld Lu ´thien singing and
dancing in a glade beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; andhe named her Tinu ´viel, that is Nightingale in the language
of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they wereparted long. Tinu ´viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of
Sauron, and together they passed through great dangers, and
cast down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and tookfrom his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest ofall jewels, to be the bride-price of Lu ´thien to Thingol her
father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that camefrom the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms ofTinu´viel. But she chose mortality, and to die from the world,
so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they metagain beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a brief time walk-ing alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,long ago, beyond the conﬁnes of this world. So it is thatLu´thien Tinu ´viel alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed
and left the world, and they have lost her whom they mostloved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of olddescended among Men. There live still those of whomLu´thien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shall
never fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Berenand Lu ´thien was born Dior Thingol’s heir; and of him Elwing
the White whom Ea ¨rendil wedded, he that sailed his ship out
of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with theSilmaril upon his brow. And of Ea ¨rendil came the Kings of
Nu´menor, that is Westernesse.’
As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager
face, dimly lit in the red glow of the wood-ﬁre. His eyes
254 the fellowship of the ring
shone, and his voice was rich and deep. Above him was a
black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over the
crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon wasclimbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed them, andthe stars above the hill-top faded.
The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched.
‘Look!’ said Merry. ‘The Moon is rising: it must be getting
late.’
The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on
the top of the hill something small and dark against the glim-mer of the moonrise. It was perhaps only a large stone orjutting rock shown up by the pale light.
Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the ﬁre.
Frodo and Pippin remained seated in silence. Strider was
watching the moonlight on the hill intently. All seemed quietand still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping over his heart,now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closerto the ﬁre. At that moment Sam came running back from theedge of the dell.
‘I don’t know what it is,’ he said, ‘but I suddenly felt afraid.
I durstn’t go outside this dell for any money; I felt that some-thing was creeping up the slope.’
‘Did you seeanything?’ asked Frodo, springing to his feet.
‘No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn’t stop to look.’‘I saw something,’ said Merry; ‘or I thought I did – away
westwards where the moonlight was falling on the ﬂatsbeyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two
or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving this way.’
‘Keep close to the ﬁre, with your faces outward!’ cried
Strider. ‘Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!’
For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with
their backs turned to the wood-ﬁre, each gazing into theshadows that encircled them. Nothing happened. There wasno sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feelingthat he must break the silence: he longed to shout out aloud.
‘Hush!’ whispered Strider. ‘What’s that?’ gasped Pippin at
the same moment.
a knife in the dark 255
Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the
hill, they felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or
more than one. They strained their eyes, and the shadowsseemed to grow. Soon there could be no doubt: three or fourtall black ﬁgures were standing there on the slope, lookingdown on them. So black were they that they seemed likeblack holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought
that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt athin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw them-
selves ﬂat on the ground. Sam shrank to Frodo’s side. Frodowas hardly less terriﬁed than his companions; he was quakingas if he was bitter cold, but his terror was swallowed up in asudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do this
laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Hedid not forget the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf;but something seemed to be compelling him to disregardall warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope ofescape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simplyfelt that he must take the Ring and put it on his ﬁnger. Hecould not speak. He felt Sam looking at him, as if he knewthat his master was in some great trouble, but he could notturn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled for a while;but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drewout the chain, and slipped the Ring on the foreﬁnger of hisleft hand.
Immediately, though everything else remained as before,
dim and dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was ableto see beneath their black wrappings. There were ﬁve tallﬁgures: two standing on the lip of the dell, three advancing.In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes; undertheir mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs werehelms of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel.Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushedtowards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and itseemed to him that it ﬂickered red, as if it was a ﬁrebrand.Two of the ﬁgures halted. The third was taller than the others:
256 the fellowship of the ring
his hair was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown.
In one hand he held a long sword, and in the other a knife;
both the knife and the hand that held it glowed with a palelight. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the
ground, and he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth!
Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at the feet of his enemy.
A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a pain like a dart
of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he swoonedhe caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Striderleaping out of the darkness with a ﬂaming brand of wood ineither hand. With a last effort Frodo, dropping his sword,slipped the Ring from his ﬁnger and closed his right handtight upon it.
Chapter12
FLIGHT TO THE FORD
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring
desperately. He was lying by the ﬁre, which was now piledhigh and burning brightly. His three companions were bend-
ing over him.
‘What has happened? Where is the pale king?’ he asked
wildly.
They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for
a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vagueshadowy shapes coming towards them. Suddenly to hishorror Sam found that his master had vanished; and at thatmoment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. Heheard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a greatdistance, or from under the earth, crying out strange words.
They saw nothing more, until they stumbled over the bodyof Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the grass withhis sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him upand lay him near the ﬁre, and then he disappeared. That wasnow a good while ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about
Strider; but while they were talking he returned, appearingsuddenly out of the shadows. They started, and Sam drewhis sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt downswiftly at his side.
‘I am not a Black Rider, Sam,’ he said gently, ‘nor in league
with them. I have been trying to discover something of theirmovements; but I have found nothing. I cannot think whythey have gone and do not attack again. But there is no feeling
of their presence anywhere at hand.’
When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of
258 the fellowship of the ring
concern, and shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered
Pippin and Merry to heat as much water as they could in
their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it. ‘Keep theﬁre going well, and keep Frodo warm!’ he said. Then hegot up and walked away, and called Sam to him. ‘I think Iunderstand things better now,’ he said in a low voice. ‘Thereseem only to have been ﬁve of the enemy. Why they were
not all here, I don’t know; but I don’t think they expected tobe resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But notfar, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannotescape. They are only waiting, because they think that theirpurpose is almost accomplished, and that the Ring cannot ﬂymuch further. I fear, Sam, that they believe your master hasa deadly wound that will subdue him to their will. We shall
see!’
Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You
must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff thanI had guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so.He is not slain, and I think he will resist the evil power of thewound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can tohelp and heal him. Guard him well, while I am away!’ Hehurried off and disappeared again into the darkness.
Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly
growing, and a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulderto his arm and side. His friends watched over him, warming
him, and bathing his wound. The night passed slowly and
wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was ﬁllingwith grey light, when Strider at last returned.
‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a
black cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A footabove the lower hem there was a slash. ‘This was the strokeof Frodo’s sword,’ he said. ‘The only hurt that it did to hisenemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish thatpierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the nameof Elbereth.’
‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again
flight to the ford 259
and lifted up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it.
As Strider raised it they saw that near the end its edge was
notched and the point was broken off. But even as he held itup in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for theblade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air,leaving only the hilt in Strider’s hand. ‘Alas!’ he cried. ‘It wasthis accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the
skill in healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do whatI can.’
He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid
it on his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strangetongue. Then setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in asoft tone spoke words the others could not catch. From thepouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a plant.
‘These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to ﬁnd; for
this plant does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets
away south of the Road I found it in the dark by the scentof its leaves.’ He crushed a leaf in his ﬁngers, and it gave outa sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It is fortunate that I couldﬁnd it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the Westbrought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it grows
now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt orcamped of old; and it is not known in the North, except tosome of those who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues,but over such a wound as this its healing powers may besmall.’
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s
shoulder. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, andthose that were unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared.The herb had also some power over the wound, for Frodofelt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in hisside; but the life did not return to his arm, and he could notraise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness,and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he nowperceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not hisown desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. Hewondered if he would remain maimed for life, and how they
260 the fellowship of the ring
would now manage to continue their journey. He felt too
weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They
quickly decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I
think now,’ said Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watchingthis place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, then hemust have been forced to ride away, and he will not return.
In any case we are in great peril here after dark, since theattack of last night, and we can hardly meet greater dangerwherever we go.’
As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried
food and packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so theydivided the greater part of their baggage among the four ofthem, and put Frodo on the pony. In the last few days the
poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fat-ter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for itsnew masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny’s treatment musthave been very hard for the journey in the wild to seem somuch better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean
crossing the Road, but it was the quickest way to morewooded country. And they needed fuel; for Strider said thatFrodo must be kept warm, especially at night, while ﬁrewould be some protection for them all. It was also his planto shorten their journey by cutting across another great loopof the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its courseand took a wide bend northwards.
They made their way slowly and cautiously round the
south-western slopes of the hill, and came in a little while tothe edge of the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. Buteven as they were hurrying across they heard far away twocries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering. Trem-bling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that layahead. The land before them sloped away southwards, but itwas wild and pathless; bushes and stunted trees grew in densepatches with wide barren spaces in between. The grass was
flight to the ford 261
scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were
faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey
was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudgedalong. Frodo’s heart was grieved as he watched them walkingbeside him with their heads down, and their backs bowedunder their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and heavy-hearted.
Before the ﬁrst day’s march was over Frodo’s pain began
to grow again, but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four
days passed, without the ground or the scene changingmuch, except that behind them Weathertop slowly sank, andbefore them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yetsince that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that theenemy had marked their ﬂight or followed them. They
dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairs by night,expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in thegrey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they sawnothing, and heard no sound but the sigh of withered leavesand grass. Not once did they feel the sense of present evilthat had assailed them before the attack in the dell. It seemedtoo much to hope that the Riders had already lost their trailagain. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in anarrow place?
At the end of the ﬁfth day the ground began once more to
rise slowly out of the wide shallow valley into which they haddescended. Strider now turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached the top of along slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle ofwooded hills. Away below them they could see the Roadsweeping round the feet of the hills; and to their right a greyriver gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In the distance theyglimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled inmist.
‘I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,’
said Strider. ‘We have now come to the River Hoarwell, thatthe Elves call Mitheithel. It ﬂows down out of the Ettenmoors,the troll-fells north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater
262 the fellowship of the ring
away in the South. Some call it the Greyﬂood after that. It is
a great water before it ﬁnds the Sea. There is no way over it
below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the LastBridge on which the Road crosses.’
‘What is that other river we can see far away there?’ asked
Merry.
‘That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,’ answered
Strider. ‘The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many
miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen. But I have notyet thought how we shall cross that water. One river at atime! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not ﬁnd the LastBridge held against us.’
Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to
the borders of the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but
they found no sign of any travellers or riders. Here under theshadow of the hills there had been some rain. Strider judgedthat it had fallen two days before, and had washed away allfootprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as hecould see.
They hurried along with all the speed they could make,
and after a mile or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, atthe bottom of a short steep slope. They dreaded to see blackﬁgures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider made themtake cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he wentforward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. ‘I can see no sign of
the enemy,’ he said, ‘and I wonder very much what thatmeans. But I have found something very strange.’
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel.
‘I found it in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,’ he said.‘It is a beryl, an elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fallby chance, I cannot say; but it brings hope to me. I will takeit as a sign that we may pass the Bridge; but beyond that Idare not keep to the Road, without some clearer token.’
***
flight to the ford 263
At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in
safety, hearing no sound but the water swirling against its
three great arches. A mile further on they came to a narrowravine that led away northwards through the steep lands onthe left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon theywere lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding amongthe feet of sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and
the perilous Road behind them; but this new country seemed
threatening and unfriendly. As they went forward the hillsabout them steadily rose. Here and there upon heights andridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, andthe ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, whowas not walking, had time to gaze ahead and to think. He
recalled Bilbo’s account of his journey and the threateningtowers on the hills north of the Road, in the country nearthe Trolls’ wood where his ﬁrst serious adventure hadhappened. Frodo guessed that they were now in the sameregion, and wondered if by chance they would pass nearthe spot.
‘Who lives in this land?’ he asked. ‘And who built these
towers? Is this troll-country?’
‘No!’ said Strider. ‘Trolls do not build. No one lives in this
land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now.They became an evil people, as legends tell, for they fellunder the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed in thewar that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that isnow so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though ashadow still lies on the land.’
‘Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty
and forgetful?’ asked Peregrin. ‘The birds and beasts do nottell tales of that sort.’
‘The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,’ said
Strider; ‘and many more things than I can tell are remem-bered in Rivendell.’
‘Have you often been to Rivendell?’ said Frodo.‘I have,’ said Strider. ‘I dwelt there once, and still I return
264 the fellowship of the ring
when I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in
peace, even in the fair house of Elrond.’
The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind
held on its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now
hidden from view. The travellers came into a long valley;
narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old andtwisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind intomounting slopes of pine-wood.
The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for
they had to pick their way through a pathless country, encum-bered by fallen trees and tumbled rocks. As long as they couldthey avoided climbing for Frodo’s sake, and because it was
in fact difﬁcult to ﬁnd any way up out of the narrow dales.They had been two days in this country when the weatherturned wet. The wind began to blow steadily out of the Westand pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads ofthe hills in ﬁne drenching rain. By nightfall they were allsoaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not getany ﬁre to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher andsteeper before them, and they were forced to turn away north-wards out of their course. Strider seemed to be getting anxi-ous: they were nearly ten days out from Weathertop, andtheir stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It wenton raining.
That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall
behind them, in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoopin the cliff. Frodo was restless. The cold and wet had madehis wound more painful than ever, and the ache and sense ofdeadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and turningand listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind inchinks of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattlingfall of a loosened stone. He felt that black shapes wereadvancing to smother him; but when he sat up he saw nothingbut the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking his pipe,and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasydream, in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the
flight to the ford 265
Shire, but it seemed faint and dim, less clear than the tall
black shadows that stood looking over the hedge.
In the morning he woke to ﬁnd that the rain had stopped.
The clouds were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale
strips of blue appeared between them. The wind was shifting
again. They did not start early. Immediately after their coldand comfortless breakfast Strider went off alone, telling theothers to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he cameback. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a lookat the lie of the land.
When he returned he was not reassuring. ‘We have come
too far to the north,’ he said, ‘and we must ﬁnd some way to
turn back southwards again. If we keep on as we are goingwe shall get up into the Ettendales far north of Rivendell.That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could per-haps ﬁnd our way through and come round to Rivendellfrom the north; but it would take too long, for I do not knowthe way, and our food would not last. So somehow or otherwe must ﬁnd the Ford of Bruinen.’
The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky
ground. They found a passage between two hills that ledthem into a valley running south-east, the direction that theywished to take; but towards the end of the day they foundtheir road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark edgeagainst the sky was broken into many bare points like teethof a blunted saw. They had a choice between going back orclimbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very
difﬁcult. Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount andstruggle along on foot. Even so they often despaired of gettingtheir pony up, or indeed of ﬁnding a path for themselves,burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and theywere all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. Theyhad climbed on to a narrow saddle between two higher points,and the land fell steeply away again, only a short distanceahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the ground
266 the fellowship of the ring
shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder
felt as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks
about him seemed shadowy and dim.
‘We cannot go any further,’ said Merry to Strider. ‘I am
afraid this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfullyanxious about him. What are we to do? Do you think theywill be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever get there?’
‘We shall see,’ answered Strider. ‘There is nothing more
that I can do in the wilderness; and it is chieﬂy because of
his wound that I am so anxious to press on. But I agree thatwe can go no further tonight.’
‘What is the matter with my master?’ asked Sam in a low
voice, looking appealingly at Strider. ‘His wound was small,and it is already closed. There’s nothing to be seen but a cold
white mark on his shoulder.’
‘Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,’
said Strider, ‘and there is some poison or evil at work thatis beyond my skill to drive out. But do not give up hope,Sam!’
Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small ﬁre
down under the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung overa shallow pit: it looked as if stone had once been quarriedthere. They sat huddled together. The wind blew chillthrough the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower downmoaning and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining
that endless dark wings were sweeping by above him, and
that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all thehollows of the hills.
The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean,
and the light pale and clear in a rain-washed sky. Their heartswere encouraged, but they longed for the sun to warm theircold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, Strider took Merrywith him and went to survey the country from the height tothe east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shiningbrightly when he returned with more comforting news. Theywere now going more or less in the right direction. If they
flight to the ford 267
went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would
have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider
had caught a glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knewthat, though it was hidden from view, the Road to the Fordwas not far from the River and lay on the side nearest tothem.
‘We must make for the Road again,’ he said. ‘We cannot
hope to ﬁnd a path through these hills. Whatever danger may
beset it, the Road is our only way to the Ford.’
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed
slowly down the southern side of the ridge; but the way wasmuch easier than they had expected, for the slope was farless steep on this side, and before long Frodo was able to
ride again. Bill Ferny’s poor old pony was developing anunexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing itsrider as many jolts as possible. The spirits of the party roseagain. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but everynow and again a mist seemed to obscure his sight, and hepassed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned
round and called to them. ‘There is a path here!’ he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made
no mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, thatclimbed with many windings out of the woods below andfaded away on the hill-top behind. In places it was now faintand overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and trees; butat one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a pathmade by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there old treeshad been cut or broken down, and large rocks cloven orheaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much
the easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and theiranxiety increased as they came into the dark woods, and thepath grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming out of abelt of ﬁr-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharplyto the left round the corner of a rocky shoulder of the hill.
268 the fellowship of the ring
When they came to the corner they looked round and saw
that the path ran on over a level strip under the face of a low
cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there was a doorhanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or
rock-chamber behind, but in the gloom inside nothing couldbe seen. Strider, Sam, and Merry pushing with all their
strength managed to open the door a little wider, and thenStrider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on theﬂoor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seennear the entrance except some great empty jars and brokenpots.
‘Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!’ said
Pippin. ‘Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we
know who made the path – and we had better get off it quick.’
‘There is no need, I think,’ said Strider, coming out. ‘It is
certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken.I don’t think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily,and we shall see.’
The path went on again from the door, and turning to the
right again across the level space plunged down a thickwooded slope. Pippin, not liking to show Strider that he wasstill afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and Strider camebehind, one on each side of Frodo’s pony, for the path wasnow broad enough for four or ﬁve hobbits to walk abreast.But they had not gone very far before Pippin came runningback, followed by Merry. They both looked terriﬁed.
‘There aretrolls!’ Pippin panted. ‘Down in a clearing in
the woods not far below. We got a sight of them through thetree-trunks. They are very large!’
‘We will come and look at them,’ said Strider, picking up
a stick. Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.
The sun was now high, and it shone down through the
half-stripped branches of the trees, and lit the clearing withbright patches of light. They halted suddenly on the edge,and peered through the tree-trunks, holding their breath.
flight to the ford 269
There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was stooping,
and the other two stood staring at him.
Strider walked forward unconcernedly. ‘Get up, old stone!’
he said, and broke his stick upon the stooping troll.
Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment
from the hobbits, and then even Frodo laughed. ‘Well!’ he
said. ‘We are forgetting our family history! These must be
the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrelling overthe right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.’
‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said
Pippin. He knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told itoften; but as a matter of fact he had never more than halfbelieved it. Even now he looked at the stone trolls with sus-picion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring
them to life again.
‘You are forgetting not only your family history, but all
you ever knew about trolls,’ said Strider. ‘It is broad daylightwith a bright sun, and yet you come back trying to scare mewith a tale of live trolls waiting for us in this glade! In anycase you might have noticed that one of them has an oldbird’s nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusualornament for a live troll!’
They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the re-
minder of Bilbo’s ﬁrst successful adventure was heartening.The sun, too, was warm and comforting, and the mist beforehis eyes seemed to be lifting a little. They rested for sometime in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right underthe shadow of the trolls’ large legs.
‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is
high?’ said Merry, when they had ﬁnished. ‘We haven’t hada song or a tale for days.’
‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at
him. ‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better,but I don’t think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig some-thing out of his memory.’
‘Come on, Sam!’ said Merry. ‘There’s more stored in your
head than you let on about.’
270 the fellowship of the ring
‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this
suit? It ain’t what I call proper poetry, if you understand me:
just a bit of nonsense. But these old images here brought itto my mind.’ Standing up, with his hands behind his back,as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o’ my nuncle Tim,
As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’
‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole.But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o’ lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don’t need his shinbone.’
Said Tom: ‘I don’t see why the likes o’ theeWithout axin’ leave should go makin’ free
With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!’
flight to the ford 271
‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins,
‘I’ll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o’ fresh meat will go down sweet!
I’ll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I’m tired o’ gnawing old bones and skins;
I’ve a mind to dine on thee now.’
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the ﬂesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain’s root,
For the seat of a troll don’t feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.
Tom’s leg is game, since home he came,And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll’s old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as
well you used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’
‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve
never heard those words before.’
Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own
272 the fellowship of the ring
head, of course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam
Gamgee on this journey. First he was a conspirator, now he’s
a jester. He’ll end up by becoming a wizard – or a warrior!’
‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’
In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were
probably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and
the dwarves had used many years before. After a few milesthey came out on the top of a high bank above the Road. Atthis point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in itsnarrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills,rolling and winding eastward among woods and heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains. Not far
down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. Onit roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seendwarf-runes and secret marks.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘That must be the stone that marked
the place where the trolls’ gold was hidden. How much is leftof Bilbo’s share, I wonder, Frodo?’
Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had
brought home no treasure more perilous, nor less easy to partwith. ‘None at all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He toldme he did not feel it was really his, as it came from robbers.’
The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early
evening. There was no sign of any other travellers to be seen.
As there was now no other possible course for them to take,
they climbed down the bank, and turning left went off as fastas they could. Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off the light ofthe fast westering sun. A cold wind ﬂowed down to meetthem from the mountains ahead.
They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road,
where they could camp for the night, when they heard asound that brought sudden fear back into their hearts: thenoise of hoofs behind them. They looked back, but they couldnot see far because of the many windings and rollings of theRoad. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten
flight to the ford 273
way and up into the deep heather and bilberry brushwood
on the slopes above, until they came to a small patch of
thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among thebushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failinglight, some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drewnearer. They were going fast, with a light clippety-clippety-clip .
Then faintly, as if it was blown away from them by the breeze,
they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling.
‘That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said
Frodo, listening intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefullythat it did not, but they all remained full of suspicion. Theyhad been in fear of pursuit for so long that any sound frombehind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was nowleaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his
ear, and a look of joy on his face.
The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly.
Clearer and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip
came the quick trotting feet. Suddenly into view below camea white horse, gleaming in the shadows, running swiftly. Inthe dusk its headstall ﬂickered and ﬂashed, as if it were stud-ded with gems like living stars. The rider’s cloak streamedbehind him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hairﬂowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo itappeared that a white light was shining through the form andraiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the
Road, leaping with a cry through the heather; but even beforehe had moved or called, the rider had reined in his horse andhalted, looking up towards the thicket where they stood.When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet himcalling out: Ai na vedui Du ´nadan! Mae govannen! His speech
and clear ringing voice left no doubt in their hearts: the riderwas of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt in the wide worldhad voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note ofhaste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speakingquickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the
274 the fellowship of the ring
bushes and hurried down to the Road. ‘This is Glorﬁndel,
who dwells in the house of Elrond,’ said Strider.
‘Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I
was sent from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you
were in danger upon the road.’
‘Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo
joyfully.
‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days
ago,’ answered Glorﬁndel. ‘Elrond received news that
troubled him. Some of my kindred, journeying in your landbeyond the Baranduin, *learned that things were amiss, and
sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that theNine were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a greatburden without guidance, for Gandalf had not returned.
There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly againstthe Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west,and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside toavoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.
‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge
of Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago.Three of the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, butthey withdrew and I pursued them westward. I came alsoupon two others, but they turned away southward. Since thenI have searched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, andfollowed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where youdescended from the hills again. But come! There is no timefor further news. Since you are here we must risk the peril ofthe Road and go. There are ﬁve behind us, and when theyﬁnd your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like thewind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, Ido not know. I fear that we may ﬁnd the Ford is already heldagainst us.’
While Glorﬁndel was speaking the shades of evening deep-
ened. Frodo felt a great weariness come over him. Ever sincethe sun began to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened,
*The Brandywine River.
flight to the ford 275
and he felt that a shadow was coming between him and the
faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt cold.
He swayed, clutching at Sam’s arm.
‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He
can’t go on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’
Glorﬁndel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and
taking him gently in his arms he looked in his face with grave
anxiety.
Brieﬂy Strider told of the attack on their camp under
Weathertop, and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt,which he had kept, and handed it to the Elf. Glorﬁndelshuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at it.
‘There are evil things written on this hilt,’ he said; ‘though
maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we
reach the house of Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as littleas you may! Alas! the wounds of this weapon are beyond myskill to heal. I will do what I can – but all the more do I urgeyou now to go on without rest.’
He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his
ﬁngers, and his face grew graver, as if what he learned dis-quieted him. But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side andarm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder to hishand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemedto grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn.He saw his friends’ faces more clearly again, and a measureof new hope and strength returned.
‘You shall ride my horse,’ said Glorﬁndel. ‘I will shorten
the stirrups up to the saddle-skirts, and you must sit as tightas you can. But you need not fear: my horse will not let anyrider fall that I command him to bear. His pace is light andsmooth; and if danger presses too near, he will bear you awaywith a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannotrival.’
‘No, he will not!’ said Frodo. ‘I shall not ride him, if I am
to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving myfriends behind in danger.’
Glorﬁndel smiled. ‘I doubt very much,’ he said, ‘if your
276 the fellowship of the ring
friends would be in danger if you were not with them! The
pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is
you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings us all inperil.’
To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to
mount Glorﬁndel’s white horse. The pony was laden instead
with a great part of the others’ burdens, so that they nowmarched lighter, and for a time made good speed; but thehobbits began to ﬁnd it hard to keep up with the swift tirelessfeet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness,and still on under the deep clouded night. There was neitherstar nor moon. Not until the grey of dawn did he allow them
to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearlyasleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed bythe sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horsein a dark dream.
They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards
from the road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemedhardly to have closed their eyes when Glorﬁndel, who hadset himself to watch while they slept, awoke them again. Thesun had now climbed far into the morning, and the cloudsand mists of the night were gone.
‘Drink this!’ said Glorﬁndel to them, pouring for each in
turn a little liquor from his silver-studded ﬂask of leather. Itwas clear as spring water and had no taste, and it did not feeleither cool or warm in the mouth; but strength and vigourseemed to ﬂow into all their limbs as they drank it. Eatenafter that draught the stale bread and dried fruit (which wasnow all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hungerbetter than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.
They had rested rather less than ﬁve hours when they took
to the Road again. Glorﬁndel still urged them on, and onlyallowed two brief halts during the day’s march. In this waythey covered almost twenty miles before nightfall, and cameto a point where the Road bent right and ran down towards
flight to the ford 277
the bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen.
So far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the
hobbits could see or hear; but often Glorﬁndel would haltand listen for a moment, if they lagged behind, and a look ofanxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to Striderin the elf-tongue.
But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain
that the hobbits could go no further that night. They were
stumbling along dizzy with weariness, and unable to think ofanything but their feet and legs. Frodo’s pain had redoubled,and during the day things about him faded to shadows ofghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, forthen the world seemed less pale and empty.
The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early
next morning. There were many miles yet to go between
them and the Ford, and they hobbled forward at the bestpace they could manage.
‘Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,’ said
Glorﬁndel; ‘for my heart warns me that the pursuit is nowswift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by theFord.’
The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there
was now in places much grass at either side, in which thehobbits walked when they could, to ease their tired feet. Inthe late afternoon they came to a place where the Road wentsuddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and thenplunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of redstone. Echoes ran along as they hurried forward; and thereseemed to be a sound of many footfalls following their own.All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ran outagain from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at thebottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long ﬂatmile, and beyond that the Ford of Rivendell. On the furtherside was a steep brown bank, threaded by a winding path;and behind that the tall mountains climbed, shoulder aboveshoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.
278 the fellowship of the ring
There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting
behind them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and
pouring through the branches of the pines. One momentGlorﬁndel turned and listened, then he sprang forward witha loud cry.
‘Fly!’ he called. ‘Fly! The enemy is upon us!’The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down
the slope. Glorﬁndel and Strider followed as rearguard. They
were only half way across the ﬂat, when suddenly there wasa noise of horses galloping. Out of the gate in the trees thatthey had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined his horse in,and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, andthen another; then again two more.
‘Ride forward! Ride!’ cried Glorﬁndel to Frodo.
He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized
him. Checking the horse to a walk, he turned and lookedback. The Riders seemed to sit upon their great steeds likethreatening statues upon a hill, dark and solid, while all thewoods and land about them receded as if into a mist. Sud-denly he knew in his heart that they were silently command-ing him to wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him.His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of his sword, andwith a red ﬂash he drew it.
‘Ride on! Ride on!’ cried Glorﬁndel, and then loud and
clear he called to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro
lim, Asfaloth!
At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the
wind along the last lap of the Road. At the same moment theblack horses leaped down the hill in pursuit, and fromthe Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had heard ﬁllingthe woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It wasanswered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends outfrom the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riderscame ﬂying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped madlytowards the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to himto run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, astheir courses converged with his.
flight to the ford 279
Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He
could no longer see his friends. The Riders behind were
falling back: even their great steeds were no match in speedfor the white elf-horse of Glorﬁndel. He looked forwardagain, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reachingthe Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain inambush. He could see them clearly now: they appeared to
have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and they wererobed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their palehands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered,and they called to him with fell voices.
Fear now ﬁlled all Frodo’s mind. He thought no longer of
his sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clungto the horse’s mane. The wind whistled in his ears, and the
bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A breath of deadlycold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a ﬂashof white ﬁre, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passedright before the face of the foremost Rider.
Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet.
He felt the quick heave and surge as the horse left the riverand struggled up the stony path. He was climbing the steepbank. He was across the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the
bank the horse halted and turned about neighing ﬁercely.There were Nine Riders at the water’s edge below, andFrodo’s spirit quailed before the threat of their uplifted faces.He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossingas easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless totry to escape over the long uncertain path from the Ford tothe edge of Rivendell, if once the Riders crossed. In anycase he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. Hatredagain stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength torefuse.
Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It
checked at the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodosat upright and brandished his sword.
‘Go back!’ he cried. ‘Go back to the Land of Mordor, and
280 the fellowship of the ring
follow me no more!’ His voice sounded thin and shrill in his
own ears. The Riders halted, but Frodo had not the power
of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him with a harsh andchilling laughter. ‘Come back! Come back!’ they called. ‘ToMordor we will take you!’
‘Go back!’ he whispered.‘The Ring! The Ring!’ they cried with deadly voices; and
immediately their leader urged his horse forward into the
water, followed closely by two others.
‘By Elbereth and Lu ´thien the Fair,’ said Frodo with a last
effort, lifting up his sword, ‘you shall have neither the Ringnor me!’
Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood
up menacing in his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo
was stricken dumb. He felt his tongue cleave to his mouth,and his heart labouring. His sword broke and fell out ofhis shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. Theforemost of the black horses had almost set foot upon theshore.
At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise
of loud waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw theriver below him rise, and down along its course there came aplumed cavalry of waves. White ﬂames seemed to Frodo toﬂicker on their crests, and he half fancied that he saw amidthe water white riders upon white horses with frothingmanes. The three Riders that were still in the midst of theFord were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buried suddenlyunder angry foam. Those that were behind drew back indismay.
With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed
to him that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on theshore, a shining ﬁgure of white light; and behind it ran smallshadowy forms waving ﬂames, that ﬂared red in the grey mistthat was falling over the world.
The black horses were ﬁlled with madness, and leaping
forward in terror they bore their riders into the rushing ﬂood.Their piercing cries were drowned in the roaring of the river
flight to the ford 281
as it carried them away. Then Frodo felt himself falling, and
the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and engulf him
together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.
.
BOOK TWO
.
Chapter 1
MANY MEETINGS
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At ﬁrst he
thought that he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dreamthat still hovered on the edge of memory. Or perhaps he had
been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it was ﬂat, and it had
dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer lookingat patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the soundof a waterfall.
‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the
ceiling.
‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morn-
ing,’ said a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty-
fourth, if you want to know.’
‘Gandalf!’ cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard,
sitting in a chair by the open window.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here,
too, after all the absurd things you have done since you left
home.’
Frodo lay down again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful
to argue, and in any case he did not think he would get thebetter of an argument. He was fully awake now, and thememory of his journey was returning: the disastrous ‘shortcut’ through the Old Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing
Pony ; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell
under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all these thingsand trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arrivingin Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the softpuffs of Gandalf’s pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out ofthe window.
‘Where’s Sam?’ Frodo asked at length. ‘And are the others
all right?’
286 the fellowship of the ring
‘Yes, they are all safe and sound,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Sam
was here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an
hour ago.’
‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed
so dim, somehow; and it still does.’
‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘The wound was overcoming you at last. A few
more hours and you would have been beyond our aid. Butyou have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As youshowed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps themost dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have heldout at Weathertop.’
‘You seem to know a great deal already,’ said Frodo. ‘I
have not spoken to the others about the Barrow. At ﬁrst it
was too horrible, and afterwards there were other things tothink about. How do you know about it?’
‘You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf
gently, ‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mindand memory. Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ justnow, I did not mean it. I think well of you – and of the others.It is no small feat to have come so far, and through suchdangers, still bearing the Ring.’
‘We should never have done it without Strider,’ said Frodo.
‘But we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.’
‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our
ruin. And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’
‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry
about anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’
‘But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which
are quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and Iremember so many things that want explaining. Why wereyou delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.’
‘You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf.
‘We shall have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. Atthe moment I will only say that I was held captive.’
‘You?’ cried Frodo.
many meetings 287
‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly.
‘There are many powers in the world, for good or for evil.
Some are greater than I am. Against some I have not yet beenmeasured. But my time is coming. The Morgul-lord and hisBlack Riders have come forth. War is preparing!’
‘Then you knew of the Riders already – before I met them?’‘Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you;
for the Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants
of the Lord of the Rings. But I did not know that they hadarisen again or I should have ﬂed with you at once. I heardnews of them only after I left you in June; but that story mustwait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, byAragorn.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was
afraid of him at ﬁrst. Sam never quite trusted him, I think,
not at any rate until we met Glorﬁndel.’
Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He
has no more doubts now.’
‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of
Strider. Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to
me; though he is strange, and grim at times. In fact, hereminds me often of you. I didn’t know that any of the BigPeople were like that. I thought, well, that they were just big,and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupidand wicked like Bill Ferny. But then we don’t know muchabout Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Bree-landers.’
‘You don’t know much even about them, if you think old
Barliman is stupid,’ said Gandalf. ‘He is wise enough on hisown ground. He thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet hecan see through a brick wall in time (as they say in Bree).But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son ofArathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearlyat an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will be theirlast adventure.’
‘Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of
the old Kings?’ said Frodo in wonder. ‘I thought they had allvanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.’
288 the fellowship of the ring
‘Only a Ranger!’ cried Gandalf. ‘My dear Frodo, that is
just what the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of
the great people, the Men of the West. They have helped mebefore; and I shall need their help in the days to come; forwe have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.’
‘I suppose not,’ said Frodo. ‘But so far my only thought
has been to get here; and I hope I shan’t have to go any
further. It is very pleasant just to rest. I have had a month ofexile and adventure, and I ﬁnd that has been as much as Iwant.’
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke
again. ‘I have been reckoning,’ he said, ‘and I can’t bringthe total up to October the twenty-fourth. It ought to bethe twenty-ﬁrst. We must have reached the Ford by the
twentieth.’
‘You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,’
said Gandalf. ‘How do the side and shoulder feel now?’
‘I don’t know,’ Frodo answered. ‘They don’t feel at all:
which is an improvement, but’ – he made an effort – ‘I canmove my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. Itis not cold,’ he added, touching his left hand with his right.
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is mending fast. You will soon be
sound again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you fordays, ever since you were brought in.’
‘Days?’ said Frodo.‘Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves
brought you from the Ford on the night of the twentieth, andthat is where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious,and Sam has hardly left your side, day or night, except torun messages. Elrond is a master of healing, but the weaponsof our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the truth, I had verylittle hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment ofthe blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be founduntil last night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeplyburied, and it was working inwards.’
Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with
notched blade that had vanished in Strider’s hands. ‘Don’t
many meetings 289
be alarmed!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is gone now. It has been melted.
And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known
strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly havebeen overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeendays.’
‘What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. ‘What
were the Riders trying to do?’
‘They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which
remains in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would
have become like they are, only weaker and under their com-mand. You would have become a wraith under the dominionof the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you fortrying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possiblethan being robbed of it and seeing it on his hand.’
‘Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!’ said
Frodo faintly. ‘I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had
known more, I should not have dared even to move. It is amarvel that I escaped!’
‘Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,’ said Gandalf, ‘not
to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, andonly your shoulder was pierced; and that was because youresisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow shave, so tospeak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, forthen you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and theymight have seized you. You could see them, and they couldsee you.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘They were terrible to behold! But
why could we all see their horses?’
‘Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are
real robes that they wear to give shape to their nothingnesswhen they have dealings with the living.’
‘Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All
other animals are terriﬁed when they draw near, even theelf-horse of Glorﬁndel. The dogs howl and the geese screamat them.’
‘Because these horses are born and bred to the service of
the Dark Lord in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels
290 the fellowship of the ring
are wraiths! There are orcs and trolls, there are wargs and
werewolves; and there have been and still are many Men,
warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet areunder his sway. And their number is growing daily.’
‘What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’‘Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may
fear the Dark Lord, and they may ﬂy before him, but never
again will they listen to him or serve him. And here in Riven-dell there live still some of his chief foes: the Elven-wise, lordsof the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They do not fearthe Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the BlessedRealm live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seenand the Unseen they have great power.’
‘I thought that I saw a white ﬁgure that shone and did not
grow dim like the others. Was that Glorﬁndel then?’
‘Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other
side: one of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of
a house of princes. Indeed there is a power in Rivendell towithstand the might of Mordor, for a while: and elsewhereother powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kindin the Shire. But all such places will soon become islandsunder siege, if things go on as they are going. The Dark Lordis putting forth all his strength.
‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his
chin, while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire,‘we must keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I donot talk you to death. You are in Rivendell, and you neednot worry about anything for the present.’
‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am
not worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends,and tell me the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep onasking, and I shall be content for the present. After that Ishall have another sleep, I think; but I shan’t be able to closemy eyes until you have ﬁnished the story for me.’
Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good
look at Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and hiseyes were clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling,
many meetings 291
and there seemed to be little wrong with him. But to the
wizard’s eye there was a faint change, just a hint as it were of
transparency, about him, and especially about the left handthat lay outside upon the coverlet.
‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He
is not half through yet, and to what he will come in the endnot even Elrond can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may
become like a glass ﬁlled with a clear light for eyes to see thatcan.’
‘You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale
without consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, andthen you must sleep again. This is what happened, as far asI can gather. The Riders made straight for you, as soon asyou ﬂed. They did not need the guidance of their horses any
longer: you had become visible to them, being already on thethreshold of their world. And also the Ring drew them. Yourfriends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have beenridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if thewhite horse could not. The Riders were too swift to over-take, and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorﬁndel andAragorn together could not withstand all the Nine at once.
‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up
behind. Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside theroad masked by a few stunted trees. There they hastilykindled ﬁre; for Glorﬁndel knew that a ﬂood would comedown, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have todeal with any that were left on his side of the river. Themoment the ﬂood appeared, he rushed out, followed byAragorn and the others with ﬂaming brands. Caught betweenﬁre and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath,they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with mad-ness. Three were carried away by the ﬁrst assault of the ﬂood;the others were now hurled into the water by their horses andoverwhelmed.’
‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo.‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Their horses must have perished,
and without them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths
292 the fellowship of the ring
themselves cannot be so easily destroyed. However, there is
nothing more to fear from them at present. Your friends
crossed after the ﬂood had passed and they found you lyingon your face at the top of the bank, with a broken swordunder you. The horse was standing guard beside you. Youwere pale and cold, and they feared that you were dead, orworse. Elrond’s folk met them, carrying you slowly towards
Rivendell.’
‘Who made the ﬂood?’ asked Frodo.‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The river of
this valley is under his power, and it will rise in anger whenhe has great need to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain ofthe Ringwraiths rode into the water the ﬂood was released.If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may
not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form ofgreat white horses with shining white riders; and there weremany rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I wasafraid that we had let loose too ﬁerce a wrath, and the ﬂoodwould get out of hand and wash you all away. There is greatvigour in the waters that come down from the snows of theMisty Mountains.’
‘Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: ‘the tremen-
dous roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends andenemies and all. But now we are safe!’
Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes.
‘Yes, you are all safe for the present. Soon there will befeasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Fordof Bruinen, and you will all be there in places of honour.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and
Glorﬁndel and such great lords, not to mention Strider,should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness.’
‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said
Gandalf, smiling. ‘I am one good reason. The Ring is another:you are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, theRing-ﬁnder.’
‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I
wish he was here and could hear all about it. It would have
many meetings 293
made him laugh. The cow jumped over the Moon! And the
poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the
Sea. That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a
perfect house, whether you like food or sleep or story-telling
or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasantmixture of them all’. Merely to be there was a cure for weari-ness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he
found that he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but hada mind for food and drink, and probably for singing andstory-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and discovered
that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever hadbeen. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth thatﬁtted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled tosee a much thinner reﬂection of himself than he remembered:it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo whoused to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyeslooked out at him thoughtfully.
‘Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped
out of a looking-glass,’ he said to his reﬂection. ‘But now fora merry meeting!’ He stretched out his arms and whistled atune.
At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam
came in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardlyand shyly. He stroked it gently and then he blushed andturned hastily away.
‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.‘It’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It
has felt so cold through the long nights. But glory and trum-pets!’ he cried, turning round again with shining eyes anddancing on the ﬂoor. ‘It’s ﬁne to see you up and yourselfagain, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you wereready to come down, and I thought he was joking.’
‘I am ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of
the party!’
294 the fellowship of the ring
‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house
this, and very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and
no knowing what you’ll ﬁnd round a corner. And Elves, sir!Elves here, and Elves there! Some like kings, terrible andsplendid; and some as merry as children. And the music andthe singing – not that I have had the time or the heart formuch listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know
some of the ways of the place.’
‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo,
taking his arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen toyour heart’s content. Come on, guide me round the corners!’
Sam led him along several passages and down many steps
and out into a high garden above the steep bank of the river.He found his friends sitting in a porch on the side of the
house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the valley below,but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains farabove. The air was warm. The sound of running and fallingwater was loud, and the evening was ﬁlled with a faint scentof trees and ﬂowers, as if summer still lingered in Elrond’sgardens.
‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble
cousin! Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’
‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the
porch. ‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all thesame we should not name them. The Lord of the Ring is notFrodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whosepower is again stretching out over the world. We are sittingin a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’
‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’
said Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seemsimpossible, somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in thisplace. I feel I could sing, if I knew the right song for theoccasion.’
‘I feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. ‘Though at the
moment I feel more like eating and drinking.’
‘That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown
your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’
many meetings 295
‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as
Gandalf reported that you were recovered, the preparations
began.’ He had hardly ﬁnished speaking when they weresummoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.
The hall of Elrond’s house was ﬁlled with folk: Elves for
the most part, though there were a few guests of other sorts.
Elrond, as was his custom, sat in a great chair at the end ofthe long table upon the dais; and next to him on the one sidesat Glorﬁndel, on the other side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before
seen Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as theysat upon his right hand and his left, Glorﬁndel, and even
Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were revealedas lords of dignity and power.
Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his
long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broadshoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancientlegend. In his aged face under great snowy brows his darkeyes were set like coals that could leap suddenly into ﬁre.
Glorﬁndel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining
gold, his face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; hiseyes were bright and keen, and his voice like music; on hisbrow sat wisdom, and in his hand was strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young,
though in it was written the memory of many things bothglad and sorrowful. His hair was dark as the shadows oftwilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his eyes weregrey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the lightof stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with manywinters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the fulness of hisstrength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty amongboth Elves and Men.
In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon
the wall, there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat alady fair to look upon, and so like was she in form of woman-hood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that she was one of his
296 the fellowship of the ring
close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids of
her dark hair were touched by no frost; her white arms and
clear face were ﬂawless and smooth, and the light of starswas in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenlyshe looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance,as of one who has known many things that the years bring.Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver
lace netted with small gems, glittering white; but her soft greyraiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaves wrought insilver.
So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet
seen; Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said thatthe likeness of Lu ´thien had come on earth again; and she was
called Undo ´miel, for she was the Evenstar of her people.
Long she had been in the land of her mother’s kin, in Lo ´rien
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Riven-
dell to her father’s house. But her brothers, Elladan andElrohir, were out upon errantry; for they rode often far aﬁeldwith the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother’storment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before
nor imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised andabashed to ﬁnd that he had a seat at Elrond’s table among allthese folk so high and fair. Though he had a suitable chair,and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very small, andrather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feastwas merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. Itwas some time before he looked about him again or eventurned to his neighbours.
He looked ﬁrst for his friends. Sam had begged to be
allowed to wait on his master, but had been told that for thistime he was a guest of honour. Frodo could see him now,sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of one ofthe side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign ofStrider.
Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appear-
ance, richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was
many meetings 297
white, nearly as white as the snow-white cloth of his garments.
He wore a silver belt, and round his neck hung a chain of
silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.
‘Welcome and well met!’ said the dwarf, turning towards
him. Then he actually rose from his seat and bowed. ‘Glo ´in
at your service,’ he said, and bowed still lower.
‘Frodo Baggins at your service and your family’s,’ said
Frodo correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions.
‘Am I right in guessing that you are theGlo´in, one of the
twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?’
‘Quite right,’ answered the dwarf, gathering up the
cushions and courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat.‘And I do not ask, for I have already been told that youare the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the
renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.’
‘Thank you very much,’ said Frodo.‘You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,’ said
Glo´in. ‘I wonder greatly what brings fourhobbits on so long
a journey. Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo camewith us. But perhaps I should not inquire too closely, sinceElrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?’
‘I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,’ said Frodo
politely. He guessed that even in Elrond’s house the matterof the Ring was not one for casual talk; and in any case hewished to forget his troubles for a time. ‘But I am equallycurious,’ he added, ‘to learn what brings so important a dwarfso far from the Lonely Mountain.’
Glo´in looked at him. ‘If you have not heard, I think we will
not speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon usall ere long, I believe, and then we shall all hear many things.But there is much else that may be told.’
Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but
Frodo listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire,apart from the Ring, seemed small and far-away and unim-portant, while Glo ´in had much to tell of events in the northern
regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn theOld, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men,
298 the fellowship of the ring
and to their land between the Mountains and Mirkwood
neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
‘Indeed,’ said Glo ´in, ‘if it were not for the Beornings, the
passage from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become
impossible. They are valiant men and keep open the HighPass and the Ford of Carrock. But their tolls are high,’ headded with a shake of his head; ‘and like Beorn of old they
are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and thatis much in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendlyto us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings.The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand sonof Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm nowreaches far south and east of Esgaroth.’
‘And what of your own people?’ asked Frodo.
‘There is much to tell, good and bad,’ said Glo ´in; ‘yet it is
mostly good: we have so far been fortunate, though we donot escape the shadow of these times. If you really wish tohear of us, I will tell you tidings gladly. But stop me whenyou are weary! Dwarves’ tongues run on when speaking oftheir handiwork, they say.’
And with that Glo ´in embarked on a long account of the
doings of the Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to havefound so polite a listener; for Frodo showed no sign of weari-ness and made no attempt to change the subject, thoughactually he soon got rather lost among the strange names ofpeople and places that he had never heard of before. He wasinterested, however, to hear that Da ´in was still King under
the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his twohundred and ﬁftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Ofthe ten companions who had survived the Battle of FiveArmies seven were still with him: Dwalin, Glo ´in, Dori, Nori,
Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur was now so fat that hecould not move himself from his couch to his chair at table,and it took six young dwarves to lift him.
‘And what has become of Balin and Ori and O ´in?’ asked
Frodo.
A shadow passed over Glo ´in’s face. ‘We do not know,’ he
many meetings 299
answered. ‘It is largely on account of Balin that I have come
to ask the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight
let us speak of merrier things!’
Glo´in began then to talk of the works of his people, telling
Frodo about their great labours in Dale and under the Moun-tain. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘But in metal-work wecannot rival our fathers, many of whose secrets are lost. We
make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot againmake mail or blade to match those that were made before thedragon came. Only in mining and building have we surpassedthe old days. You should see the waterways of Dale, Frodo,and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and cavernousstreets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then youwould see that we have not been idle.’
‘I will come and see them, if ever I can,’ said Frodo. ‘How
surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in theDesolation of Smaug!’
Glo´in looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘You were very fond of
Bilbo were you not?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Frodo. ‘I would rather see him than all the
towers and palaces in the world.’
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose
and went down the hall, and the company followed them
in due order. The doors were thrown open, and they went
across a wide passage and through other doors, and cameinto a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright ﬁre wasburning in a great hearth between the carven pillars uponeither side.
Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. ‘This is the
Hall of Fire,’ said the wizard. ‘Here you will hear many songsand tales – if you can keep awake. But except on high daysit usually stands empty and quiet, and people come here whowish for peace, and thought. There is always a ﬁre here, allthe year round, but there is little other light.’
300 the fellowship of the ring
As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for
him, Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the
hall ﬁlled, and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fairfaces that were gathered together; the golden ﬁrelight playedupon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed,not far from the further end of the ﬁre, a small dark ﬁgureseated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside
him on the ground was a drinking-cup and some bread.Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people were ever ill inRivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. Hishead seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of hisdark cloak was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent ﬁgure.
‘Awake, little master!’ he said, with a smile. Then, turning to
Frodo, he beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has comethat you have wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friendthat you have long missed.’
The dark ﬁgure raised its head and uncovered its face.‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he
sprang forward.
‘Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. ‘So you have got here at
last. I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all thisfeasting is in your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyedyourself?’
‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t
I been allowed to see you before?’
‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you.
I have sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for thefeast, I don’t go in for such things much now. And I hadsomething else to do.’
‘What were you doing?’‘Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and
this is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’he said, cocking an eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinklein it and no sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wakeup! I was not asleep, Master Elrond. If you want to know,you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you
many meetings 301
have disturbed me – in the middle of making up a song. I
was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking about them;
but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right. Therewill be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven cleanout of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Du ´nadan to
help me. Where is he?’
Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. ‘Then you
two shall go into a corner and ﬁnish your task, and we will
hear it and judge it before we end our merrymaking.’ Messen-gers were sent to ﬁnd Bilbo’s friend, though none knew wherehe was, or why he had not been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and
Sam came quickly and placed himself near them. They talkedtogether in soft voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in
the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of himself.When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly,along the Road or in the country on either side; but somehowhe had steered all the time towards Rivendell.
‘I got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a
rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. Ishan’t travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I cameback here, and here I have been. I have done this and that.I have written some more of my book. And, of course, I makeup a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to pleaseme, I think; for, of course, they aren’t really good enough forRivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn’t seem topass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether.
‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and
out of the South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heardabout the Ring, of course. Gandalf has been here often. Notthat he has told me a great deal, he has become closer thanever these last few years. The Du ´nadan has told me more.
Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is apity that Gandalf did not ﬁnd out more sooner. I could havebrought the thing here myself long ago without so muchtrouble. I have thought several times of going back to Hobbi-ton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me:
302 the fellowship of the ring
Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the
Enemy was looking high and low for me, and would make
mincemeat of me, if he caught me tottering about in theWild.
‘And Gandalf said: ‘‘The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It
would do no good to you or to others, if you tried to meddlewith it again.’’ Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he
said he was looking after you, so I let things be. I am fright-fully glad to see you safe and sound.’ He paused and lookedat Frodo doubtfully.
‘Have you got it here?’ he asked in a whisper. ‘I can’t help
feeling curious, you know, after all I’ve heard. I should verymuch like just to peep at it again.’
‘Yes, I’ve got it,’ answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluc-
tance. ‘It looks just the same as ever it did.’
‘Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,’ said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the
Ring had been hung about his neck on a new chain, light butstrong. Slowly he drew it out. Bilbo put out his hand. ButFrodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his distress and amaze-ment he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; ashadow seemed to have fallen between them, and throughit he found himself eyeing a little wrinkled creature with ahungry face and bony groping hands. He felt a desire to strikehim.
The music and singing round them seemed to falter, and
a silence fell. Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo’s face and passedhis hand across his eyes. ‘I understand now,’ he said. ‘Put itaway! I am sorry: sorry you have come in for this burden;sorry about everything. Don’t adventures ever have an end?I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story.Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s any good trying toﬁnish my book? But don’t let’s worry about it now – let’shave some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!’
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving
hardly a shred of memory. The light and music of Rivendell
many meetings 303
was about him again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily.
Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo could tell –
aided and corrected now and again by Sam – was of thegreatest interest to him, from the felling of the least tree tothe pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton. They were sodeep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did notnotice the arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth. For many
minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.
Suddenly Bilbo looked up. ‘Ah, there you are at last, Du ´n-
adan!’ he cried.
‘Strider!’ said Frodo. ‘You seem to have a lot of names.’‘Well, Strider is one that I haven’t heard before, anyway,’
said Bilbo. ‘What do you call him that for?’
‘They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, ‘and that
is how I was introduced to him.’
‘And why do you call him Du ´nadan?’ asked Frodo.
‘TheDu´nadan,’ said Bilbo. ‘He is often called that here.
But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know du´n-
adan : Man of the West, Nu ´meno´rean. But this is not the time
for lessons!’ He turned to Strider. ‘Where have you been, my
friend? Why weren’t you at the feast? The Lady Arwen wasthere.’
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. ‘I know,’ he said.
‘But often I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir havereturned out of the Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidingsthat I wished to hear at once.’
‘Well, my dear fellow,’ said Bilbo, ‘now you’ve heard the
news, can’t you spare me a moment? I want your help insomething urgent. Elrond says this song of mine is to beﬁnished before the end of the evening, and I am stuck. Let’sgo off into a corner and polish it up!’
Strider smiled. ‘Come then!’ he said. ‘Let me hear it!’
Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen
asleep. He was alone and felt rather forlorn, although all
about him the folk of Rivendell were gathered. But those nearhim were silent, intent upon the music of the voices and the
304 the fellowship of the ring
instruments, and they gave no heed to anything else. Frodo
began to listen.
At ﬁrst the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven
words in elven-tongues, even though he understood them
little, held him in a spell, as soon as he began to attend tothem. Almost it seemed that the words took shape, andvisions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet
imagined opened out before him; and the ﬁrelit hall becamelike a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon themargins of the world. Then the enchantment became moreand more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river ofswelling gold and silver was ﬂowing over him, too multitu-dinous for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part ofthe throbbing air about him, and it drenched and drowned
him. Swiftly he sank under its shining weight into a deeprealm of sleep.
There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned
into running water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemedto be the voice of Bilbo chanting verses. Faint at ﬁrst andthen clearer ran the words.
Ea¨rendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;he built a boat of timber felledin Nimbrethil to journey in;her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow he fashioned like a swan,and light upon her banners laid.
In panoply of ancient kings,
in chaine ´d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runesto ward all wounds and harm from him;his bow was made of dragon-horn,his arrows shorn of ebony,of silver was his habergeon,
many meetings 305
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,an eagle-plume upon his crest,upon his breast an emerald.
Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,bewildered on enchanted waysbeyond the days of mortal lands.From gnashing of the Narrow Icewhere shadow lies on frozen hills,from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving stillon starless waters far astrayat last he came to Night of Naught,and passed, and never sight he sawof shining shore nor light he sought.The winds of wrath came driving him,and blindly in the foam he ﬂedfrom west to east, and errandless,unheralded he homeward sped.
There ﬂying Elwing came to him,
and ﬂame was in the darkness lit;more bright than light of diamond
the ﬁre upon her carcanet.
The Silmaril she bound on himand crowned him with the living light,and dauntless then with burning browhe turned his prow; and in the nightfrom Otherworld beyond the Seathere strong and free a storm arose,a wind of power in Tarmenel;by paths that seldom mortal goeshis boat it bore with biting breathas might of death across the grey
306 the fellowship of the ring
and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away.
Through Evernight he back was borne
on black and roaring waves that rano’er leagues unlit and foundered shores
that drowned before the Days began,until he heard on strands of pearlwhere ends the world the music long,where ever-foaming billows rollthe yellow gold and jewels wan.He saw the Mountain silent risewhere twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamarbeheld afar beyond the seas.A wanderer escaped from nightto haven white he came at last,to Elvenhome the green and fairwhere keen the air, where pale as glassbeneath the Hill of Ilmarina-glimmer in a valley sheerthe lamplit towers of Tirionare mirrored on the Shadowmere.
He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.They clothed him then in elven-white,and seven lights before him sent,as through the Calacirianto hidden land forlorn he went.He came unto the timeless hallswhere shining fall the countless years,and endless reigns the Elder Kingin Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;and words unheard were spoken then
many meetings 307
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein.
A ship then new they built for him
of mithril and of elven-glasswith shining prow; no shaven oar
nor sail she bore on silver mast:the Silmaril as lantern lightand banner bright with living ﬂameto gleam thereon by Elberethherself was set, who thither cameand wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,to sail the shoreless skies and comebehind the Sun and light of Moon.
From Evereven’s lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fallhis wings him bore, a wandering light,beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.From World’s End then he turned away,and yearned again to ﬁnd afarhis home through shadows journeying,and burning as an island staron high above the mists he came,
a distant ﬂame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawnwhere grey the Norland waters run.
And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping soreof women and of elven-maidsin Elder Days, in years of yore.But on him mighty doom was laid,till Moon should fade, an orbe ´d star
to pass, and tarry never more
308 the fellowship of the ring
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never restto bear his shining lamp afar,the Flammifer of Westernesse.
The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that
Bilbo was seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were
smiling and applauding.
‘Now we had better have it again,’ said an Elf.Bilbo got up and bowed. ‘I am ﬂattered, Lindir,’ he said.
‘But it would be too tiring to repeat it all.’
‘Not too tiring for you,’ the Elves answered laughing. ‘You
know you are never tired of reciting your own verses. But
really we cannot answer your question at one hearing!’
‘What!’ cried Bilbo. ‘You can’t tell which parts were mine,
and which were the Du ´nadan’s?’
‘It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two
mortals,’ said the Elf.
‘Nonsense, Lindir,’ snorted Bilbo. ‘If you can’t distinguish
between a Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer thanI imagined. They’re as different as peas and apples.’
‘Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,’
laughed Lindir. ‘Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not beenour study. We have other business.’
‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am sleepy after so
much music and singing. I’ll leave you to guess, if you wantto.’
He got up and came towards Frodo. ‘Well, that’s over,’ he
said in a low voice. ‘It went off better than I expected. I don’toften get asked for a second hearing. What did you thinkof it?’
‘I am not going to try and guess,’ said Frodo smiling.‘You needn’t,’ said Bilbo. ‘As a matter of fact it was all
mine. Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a greenstone. He seemed to think it important. I don’t know why.Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing rather above
many meetings 309
my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses
about Ea ¨rendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I
suppose he was right.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It seemed to me to ﬁt somehow,
though I can’t explain. I was half asleep when you began,
and it seemed to follow on from something that I was dream-ing about. I didn’t understand that it was really you speaking
until near the end.’
‘Itisdifﬁcult to keep awake here, until you get used to it,’
said Bilbo. ‘Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite theElvish appetite for music and poetry and tales. They seem tolike them as much as food, or more. They will be going onfor a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off for somemore quiet talk?’
‘Can we?’ said Frodo.
‘Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and
go as you like, as long as you don’t make a noise.’
They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and
made for the doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still witha smile on his face. In spite of his delight in Bilbo’s companyFrodo felt a tug of regret as they passed out of the Hall ofFire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a single clearvoice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,silivren penna mı ´riel
o menel aglar elenath!Na-chaered palan-dı ´riel
o galadhremmin ennorath,Fanuilos, le linnathonnef aear, sı ´nef aearon!
Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in
his chair and the ﬁre was on his face like summer-light uponthe trees. Near him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surpriseFrodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his dark cloak was
310 the fellowship of the ring
thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a
star shone on his breast. They spoke together, and then sud-
denly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him,and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and piercedhis heart.
He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the
Elvish song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody.
‘It is a song to Elbereth,’ said Bilbo. ‘They will sing that, andother songs of the Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Comeon!’
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to
the gardens and looked south across the ravine of theBruinen. There they sat for some while, looking through thewindow at the bright stars above the steep-climbing woods,
and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small news ofthe Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils thatencompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen inthe world together, of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and thegentle fall of the bright year in the woods.
At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your
pardon,’ said Sam, putting in his head, ‘but I was just wonder-ing if you would be wanting anything.’
‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess
you mean that it is time your master went to bed.’
‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and
he only got up today for the ﬁrst time.’
‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and
tell Gandalf that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo!Bless me, but it has been good to see you again! There areno folk like hobbits after all for a real good talk. I am gettingvery old, and I began to wonder if I should live to see yourchapters of our story. Good night! I’ll take a walk, I think,and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’
Chapter 2
THE COUNCIL OF ELROND
Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He
walked along the terraces above the loud-ﬂowing Bruinenand watched the pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains,
and shine down, slanting through the thin silver mist; the
dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the wovennets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked besidehim, saying nothing, but snifﬁng the air, and looking everynow and again with wonder in his eyes at the great heights
in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they
came upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Goodmorning!’ said Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’
‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of
all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I
should like to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointedaway far up the side of Rivendell to the north.
‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot
make any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out.
‘That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ criedGandalf. ‘Come along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the
winding path back to the house; behind them, uninvited andfor the moment forgotten, trotted Sam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his
friends the evening before. The light of the clear autumnmorning was now glowing in the valley. The noise of bub-bling waters came up from the foaming river-bed. Birds weresinging, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo
312 the fellowship of the ring
his dangerous ﬂight, and the rumours of the darkness growing
in the world outside, already seemed only the memories of a
troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to meet themas they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence
about him. Frodo saw Glorﬁndel and Glo ´in; and in a corner
alone Strider was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes
again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by his side, and presentedhim to the company, saying:
‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few
have ever come hither through greater peril or on an errandmore urgent.’
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had
not met before. There was a younger dwarf at Glo ´in’s side:
his son Gimli. Beside Glorﬁndel there were several other
counsellors of Elrond’s household, of whom Erestor was thechief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havenswho had come on an errand from Cı ´rdan the Shipwright.
There was also a strange Elf clad in green and brown,Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the King ofthe Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apartwas a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired andgrey-eyed, proud and stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horse-
back; and indeed though his garments were rich, and hiscloak was lined with fur, they were stained with long travel.He had a collar of silver in which a single white stone wasset; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric hewore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid uponhis knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.
‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man
from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeksfor counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here hisquestions will be answered.’
Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need
now be told. Much was said of events in the world outside,
the council of elrond 313
especially in the South, and in the wide lands east of the
Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already heard many
rumours; but the tale of Glo ´in was new to him, and when the
dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid thesplendour of their works of hand the hearts of the Dwarvesof the Lonely Mountain were troubled.
‘It is now many years ago,’ said Glo ´in, ‘that a shadow of
disquiet fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at
ﬁrst perceive. Words began to be whispered in secret: it wassaid that we were hemmed in a narrow place, and that greaterwealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Somespoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that arecalled in our own tongue Khazad-du ˆm; and they declared
that now at last we had the power and numbers to return.’
Glo´in sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern
world! Too deep we delved there, and woke the nameless
fear. Long have its vast mansions lain empty since the chil-dren of Durin ﬂed. But now we spoke of it again with longing,and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doorsof Khazad-du ˆm for many lives of kings, save Thro ´r only, and
he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the whispers,and resolved to go; and though Da ´in did not give leave will-
ingly, he took with him Ori and O ´in and many of our folk,
and they went away south.
‘That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had
news and it seemed good: messages reported that Moria hadbeen entered and a great work begun there. Then there wassilence, and no word has ever come from Moria since.
‘Then about a year ago a messenger came to Da ´in, but not
from Moria – from Mordor: a horseman in the night, whocalled Da ´in to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he
said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it,such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerninghobbits , of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. ‘‘For
Sauron knows,’’ said he, ‘‘that one of these was known toyou on a time.’’
‘At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer.
314 the fellowship of the ring
And then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have
sweetened it if he could. ‘‘As a small token only of your
friendship Sauron asks this,’’ he said: ‘‘that you should ﬁndthis thief,’’ such was his word, ‘‘and get from him, willing orno, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is buta triﬂe that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will.Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf-sires possessed of old
shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall beyours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he stilllives and where, and you shall have great reward and lastingfriendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seemso well. Do you refuse?’’
‘At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who
stood by shuddered, but Da ´in said: ‘‘I say neither yea nor
nay. I must consider this message and what it means under
its fair cloak.’’
‘ ‘‘Consider well, but not too long,’’ said he.‘ ‘‘The time of my thought is my own to spend,’’ answered
Da´in.
‘ ‘‘For the present,’’ said he, and rode into the darkness.‘Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that
night. We needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warnus that his words held both menace and deceit; for we knewalready that the power that has re-entered Mordor has notchanged, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the messengerhas returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and lasttime, so he says, is soon to come, before the ending of theyear.
‘And so I have been sent at last by Da ´in to warn Bilbo that
he is sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why hedesires this ring, this least of rings. Also we crave the adviceof Elrond. For the Shadow grows and draws nearer. Wediscover that messengers have come also to King Brand inDale, and that he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Alreadywar is gathering on his eastern borders. If we make no answer,the Enemy may move Men of his rule to assail King Brand,and Da ´in also.’
the council of elrond 315
‘You have done well to come,’ said Elrond. ‘You will hear
today all that you need in order to understand the purposes
of the Enemy. There is naught that you can do, other thanto resist, with hope or without it. But you do not stand alone.You will learn that your trouble is but part of the trouble ofall the western world. The Ring! What shall we do with theRing, the least of rings, the triﬂe that Sauron fancies? That
is the doom that we must deem.
‘That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called,
I say, though I have not called you to me, strangers fromdistant lands. You have come and are here met, in this verynick of time, by chance as it may seem. Yet it is not so.Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit here,and none others, must now ﬁnd counsel for the peril of the
world.
‘Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have
been hidden from all but a few until this day. And ﬁrst, sothat all may understand what is the peril, the Tale of the Ringshall be told from the beginning even to this present. And Iwill begin that tale, though others shall end it.’
Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of
Sauron and the Rings of Power, and their forging in theSecond Age of the world long ago. A part of his tale wasknown to some there, but the full tale to none, and manyeyes were turned to Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of
the Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria,
and their eagerness for knowledge, by which Sauron ensnaredthem. For in that time he was not yet evil to behold, and theyreceived his aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learnedall their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly inthe Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. ButCelebrimbor was aware of him, and hid the Three which hehad made; and there was war, and the land was laid waste,and the gate of Moria was shut.
Then through all the years that followed he traced the
Ring; but since that history is elsewhere recounted, even as
316 the fellowship of the ring
Elrond himself set it down in his books of lore, it is not here
recalled. For it is a long tale, full of deeds great and terrible,
and brieﬂy though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up the sky,and the morning was passing ere he ceased.
Of Nu ´menor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return
of the Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of theSea, borne upon the wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall
and his mighty sons, Isildur and Ana ´rion, became great lords;
and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the South-realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin. But Sauronof Mordor assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance ofElves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil weremustered in Arnor.
Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. ‘I remember
well the splendour of their banners,’ he said. ‘It recalled to
me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand,so many great princes and captains were assembled. And yetnot so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was broken,and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it wasnot so.’
‘You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud
in his astonishment. ‘But I thought,’ he stammered as Elrondturned towards him, ‘I thought that the fall of Gil-galad wasa long age ago.’
‘So it was indeed,’ answered Elrond gravely. ‘But my
memory reaches back even to the Elder Days. Ea ¨rendil was
my sire, who was born in Gondolin before its fall; and mymother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Lu ´thien of
Doriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the world, andmany defeats, and many fruitless victories.
‘I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host.
I was at the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate ofMordor, where we had the mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galadand the Sword of Elendil, Aeglos and Narsil, none couldwithstand. I beheld the last combat on the slopes of Orodruin,where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil brokebeneath him; but Sauron himself was overthrown, and Isildur
the council of elrond 317
cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-shard of his father’s
sword, and took it for his own.’
At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. ‘So that is what
became of the Ring!’ he cried. ‘If ever such a tale was told in
the South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard of theGreat Ring of him that we do not name; but we believed thatit perished from the world in the ruin of his ﬁrst realm. Isildur
took it! That is tidings indeed.’
‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond. ‘Isildur took it, as should not have
been. It should have been cast then into Orodruin’s ﬁre nighat hand where it was made. But few marked what Isildur did.He alone stood by his father in that last mortal contest; andby Gil-galad only Cı ´rdan stood, and I. But Isildur would not
listen to our counsel.
‘ ‘‘This I will have as weregild for my father, and my
brother,’’ he said; and therefore whether we would or no, he
took it to treasure it. But soon he was betrayed by it to hisdeath; and so it is named in the North Isildur’s Bane. Yetdeath maybe was better than what else might have befallenhim.
‘Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a
few. Small wonder is it that you have not heard them,Boromir. From the ruin of the Gladden Fields, where Isildurperished, three men only came ever back over the mountainsafter long wandering. One of these was Ohtar, the esquire ofIsildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and hebrought them to Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being buta child had remained here in Rivendell. But Narsil was brokenand its light extinguished, and it has not yet been forgedagain.
‘Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not
wholly so, yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was dimin-ished, but not destroyed. His Ring was lost but not unmade.The Dark Tower was broken, but its foundations were notremoved; for they were made with the power of the Ring,and while it remains they will endure. Many Elves and manymighty Men, and many of their friends, had perished in the
318 the fellowship of the ring
war. Ana ´rion was slain, and Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad
and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any
such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and theFirstborn decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. Andever since that day the race of Nu ´menor has decayed, and
the span of their years has lessened.
‘In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden
Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their
city of Annu ´minas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin; and
the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on thehigh North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call itDeadmen’s Dike, and they fear to tread there. For the folkof Arnor dwindled, and their foes devoured them, and theirlordship passed, leaving only green mounds in the grassy
hills.
‘In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for
a while its splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the mightof Nu ´menor, ere it fell. High towers that people built, and
strong places, and havens of many ships; and the wingedcrown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of manytongues. Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars,through the midst of which the River ﬂowed. And MinasIthil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon ashoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at thefeet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Towerof the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew awhite tree, from the seed of that tree which Isildur broughtover the deep waters, and the seed of that tree before camefrom Eresse ¨a, and before that out of the Uttermost West in
the Day before days when the world was young.
‘But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the
line of Meneldil son of Ana ´rion failed, and the Tree withered,
and the blood of the Nu ´meno´reans became mingled with that
of lesser men. Then the watch upon the walls of Mordorslept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on atime evil things came forth, and they took Minas Ithil andabode in it, and they made it into a place of dread; and it is
the council of elrond 319
called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery. Then Minas
Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard;
and these two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which laybetween was deserted and in its ruins shadows walked.
‘So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of
Minas Tirith still ﬁght on, defying our enemies, keeping thepassage of the River from Argonath to the Sea. And now that
part of the tale that I shall tell is drawn to its close. For in thedays of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of all knowledge,and the Three were released from its dominion. But now inthis latter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrowthe One has been found. Others shall speak of its ﬁnding, forin that I played small part.’
He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud,
before them. ‘Give me leave, Master Elrond,’ said he, ‘ﬁrst
to say more of Gondor, for verily from the land of Gondor Iam come. And it would be well for all to know what passesthere. For few, I deem, know of our deeds, and thereforeguess little at their peril, if we should fail at last.
‘Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of
Nu´menor is spent, nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By
our valour the wild folk of the East are still restrained, andthe terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thus alone are peaceand freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark ofthe West. But if the passages of the River should be won,what then?
‘Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Name-
less Enemy has arisen again. Smoke rises once more fromOrodruin that we call Mount Doom. The power of the BlackLand grows and we are hard beset. When the Enemy re-turned our folk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain eastof the River, though we kept a foothold there and strength ofarms. But this very year, in the days of June, sudden warcame upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away.We were outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with theEasterlings and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by
320 the fellowship of the ring
numbers that we were defeated. A power was there that we
have not felt before.
‘Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horse-
man, a dark shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a
madness ﬁlled our foes, but fear fell on our boldest, so thathorse and man gave way and ﬂed. Only a remnant of oureastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still
stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath.
‘I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast
down behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: mybrother and myself and two others. But still we ﬁght on,holding all the west shores of Anduin; and those who shelterbehind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: muchpraise but little help. Only from Rohan now will any men
ride to us when we call.
‘In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many
dangerous leagues to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I havejourneyed all alone. But I do not seek allies in war. The mightof Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it is said. I come toask for counsel and the unravelling of hard words. For on theeve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in atroubled sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to himagain, and once to me.
‘In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and
there was a growing thunder, but in the West a pale lightlingered, and out of it I heard a voice, remote but clear,crying:
Seek for the Sword that was broken:
In Imladris it dwells;
There shall be counsels taken
Stronger than Morgul-spells.
There shall be shown a token
That Doom is near at hand,
For Isildur’s Bane shall waken,
And the Halﬂing forth shall stand.
the council of elrond 321
Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to
our father, Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore
of Gondor. This only would he say, that Imladris was of oldthe name among the Elves of a far northern dale, whereElrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest of lore-masters. There-fore my brother, seeing how desperate was our need, waseager to heed the dream and seek for Imladris; but since the
way was full of doubt and danger, I took the journey uponmyself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long haveI wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond,of which many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’
‘And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear
to you,’ said Aragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon
the table that stood before Elrond, and the blade was in twopieces. ‘Here is the Sword that was Broken!’ he said.
‘And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas
Tirith?’ asked Boromir, looking in wonder at the lean face ofthe Ranger and his weather-stained cloak.
‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘and he is
descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s sonof Minas Ithil. He is the Chief of the Du ´nedain in the North,
and few are now left of that folk.’
‘Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!’ cried Frodo
in amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected theRing to be demanded at once.
‘It does not belong to either of us,’ said Aragorn; ‘but it
has been ordained that you should hold it for a while.’
‘Bring out the Ring, Frodo!’ said Gandalf solemnly. ‘The
time has come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understandthe remainder of his riddle.’
There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He
was shaken by a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a greatreluctance to reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch. Hewished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and ﬂickered ashe held it up before them in his trembling hand.
322 the fellowship of the ring
‘Behold Isildur’s Bane!’ said Elrond.
Boromir’s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing.
‘The Halﬂing!’ he muttered. ‘Is then the doom of Minas Tirith
come at last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?’
‘The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith ,’ said
Aragorn. ‘But doom and great deeds are indeed at hand. Forthe Sword that was Broken is the Sword of Elendil that broke
beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured by his heirswhen all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of oldamong us that it should be made again when the Ring,Isildur’s Bane, was found. Now you have seen the sword thatyou have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for theHouse of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?’
‘I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the
meaning of a riddle,’ answered Boromir proudly. ‘Yet we are
hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a helpbeyond our hope – if such a thing could indeed return out ofthe shadows of the past.’ He looked again at Aragorn, anddoubt was in his eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he
was annoyed on his friend’s behalf. Standing suddenly up heburst out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king.
‘Not very good perhaps, but to the point – if you need morebeyond the word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of ahundred and ten days to hear, you had best listen to it.’ Hesat down with a snort.
‘I made that up myself,’ he whispered to Frodo, ‘for the
the council of elrond 323
Du´nadan, a long time ago when he ﬁrst told me about him-
self. I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and
that I could go with him when his day comes.’
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again.
‘For my part I forgive your doubt,’ he said. ‘Little do Iresemble the ﬁgures of Elendil and Isildur as they standcarven in their majesty in the halls of Denethor. I am but the
heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life anda long; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor area small part in the count of my journeys. I have crossed manymountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains, eveninto the far countries of Rhu ˆn and Harad where the stars are
strange.
‘But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here
the heirs of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken
from father unto son for many generations. Our days havedarkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the Sword haspassed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir,ere I end. Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters– but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy; for they arefound in many places, not in Mordor only.
‘If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have
played another part. Many evil things there are that yourstrong walls and bright swords do not stay. You know littleof the lands beyond your bounds. Peace and freedom, doyou say? The North would have known them little but forus. Fear would have destroyed them. But when dark thingscome from the houseless hills, or creep from sunless woods,they ﬂy from us. What roads would any dare to tread, whatsafety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simplemen at night, if the Du ´nedain were asleep, or were all gone
into the grave?
‘And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at
us, and countrymen give us scornful names. ‘‘Strider’’ I amto one fat man who lives within a day’s march of foes thatwould freeze his heart, or lay his little town in ruin, if he werenot guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it otherwise.
324 the fellowship of the ring
If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be,
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the
task of my kindred, while the years have lengthened and thegrass has grown.
‘But now the world is changing once again. A new hour
comes. Isildur’s Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Swordshall be reforged. I will come to Minas Tirith.’
‘Isildur’s Bane is found, you say,’ said Boromir. ‘I have
seen a bright ring in the Halﬂing’s hand; but Isildur perished
ere this age of the world began, they say. How do the Wiseknow that this ring is his? And how has it passed down theyears, until it is brought hither by so strange a messenger?’
‘That shall be told,’ said Elrond.‘But not yet, I beg, Master!’ cried Bilbo. ‘Already the Sun
is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to
strengthen me.’
‘I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. ‘But I do so
now. Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet castyour story into verse, you may tell it in plain words. Thebriefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.’
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo. ‘I will do as you bid. But I will now
tell the true story, and if some here have heard me tell itotherwise’ – he looked sidelong at Glo ´in – ‘I ask them to
forget it and forgive me. I only wished to claim the treasureas my very own in those days, and to be rid of the name ofthief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things alittle better now. Anyway, this is what happened.’
To some there Bilbo’s tale was wholly new, and they
listened with amazement while the old hobbit, actually not atall displeased, recounted his adventure with Gollum, at fulllength. He did not omit a single riddle. He would have givenalso an account of his party and disappearance from theShire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand.
‘Well told, my friend,’ he said, ‘but that is enough at this
time. For the moment it sufﬁces to know that the Ring passedto Frodo, your heir. Let him now speak!’
the council of elrond 325
Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his deal-
ings with the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping.
Every step of his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford ofBruinen was questioned and considered, and everything thathe could recall concerning the Black Riders was examined.At last he sat down again.
‘Not bad,’ Bilbo said to him. ‘You would have made a
good story of it, if they hadn’t kept on interrupting. I tried to
make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all againtogether some time, if I am to write it up. There are wholechapters of stuff before you ever got here!’
‘Yes, it made quite a long tale,’ answered Frodo. ‘But the
story still does not seem complete to me. I still want to knowa good deal, especially about Gandalf.’
Galdor of the Havens, who sat nearby, overheard him.
‘You speak for me also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he
said: ‘The Wise may have good reason to believe that thehalﬂing’s trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate,unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. Butmay we not hear the proofs? And I would ask this also. Whatof Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings, yet he isnot among us. What is his counsel – if he knows the thingsthat we have heard?’
‘The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,’
said Elrond. ‘I had not overlooked them, and they shall be
answered. But these things it is the part of Gandalf to make
clear; and I call upon him last, for it is the place of honour,and in all this matter he has been the chief.’
‘Some, Galdor,’ said Gandalf, ‘would think the tidings of
Glo´in, and the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the
halﬂing’s trove is a thing of great worth to the Enemy. Yet itis a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazgu ˆl keep. The Seven
are taken or destroyed.’ At this Glo ´in stirred, but did not
speak. ‘The Three we know of. What then is this one that hedesires so much?
‘There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River
326 the fellowship of the ring
and the Mountain, between the loss and the ﬁnding. But the
gap in the knowledge of the Wise has been ﬁlled at last. Yet
too slowly. For the Enemy has been close behind, closer eventhan I feared. And well is it that not until this year, this verysummer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth.
‘Some here will remember that many years ago I myself
dared to pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,
and secretly explored his ways, and found thus that our fearswere true: he was none other than Sauron, our Enemy ofold, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, willremember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deedsagainst him, and for long we watched him only. Yet at last,as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the Council putforth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood – and
that was in the very year of the ﬁnding of this Ring: a strangechance, if chance it was.
‘But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had
watched us, and had long prepared against our stroke, gov-erning Mordor from afar through Minas Morgul, where hisNine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he gave waybefore us, but only feigned to ﬂee, and soon after came tothe Dark Tower and openly declared himself. Then for thelast time the Council met; for now we learned that he wasseeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then thathe had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But Sarumansaid nay, and repeated what he had said to us before: thatthe One would never again be found in Middle-earth.
‘ ‘‘At the worst,’’ said he, ‘‘our Enemy knows that we have
it not, and that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet befound, he thinks. Fear not! His hope will cheat him. Have Inot earnestly studied this matter? Into Anduin the Great itfell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled down theRiver to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.’’ ’
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the
far peaks of the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots theperil of the world had so long lain hidden. He sighed.
the council of elrond 327
‘There I was at fault,’ he said. ‘I was lulled by the words
of Saruman the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth
sooner, and our peril would now be less.’
‘We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, ‘and but for your vigil-
ance the Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. Butsay on!’
‘From the ﬁrst my heart misgave me, against all reason
that I knew,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I desired to know how this
thing came to Gollum, and how long he had possessed it. SoI set a watch for him, guessing that he would ere long comeforth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, buthe escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matterrest, watching and waiting only, as we have too often done.
‘Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awak-
ened again to sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit’s ring?
What, if my fear was true, should be done with it? Thosethings I must decide. But I spoke yet of my dread to none,knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray.In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has everbeen our greatest foe.
‘That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that
spies of many sorts, even beasts and birds, were gatheredround the Shire, and my fear grew. I called for the help ofthe Du ´nedain, and their watch was doubled; and I opened
my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.’
‘And I,’ said Aragorn, ‘counselled that we should hunt for
Gollum, too late though it may seem. And since it seemed ﬁtthat Isildur’s heir should labour to repair Isildur’s fault, Iwent with Gandalf on the long and hopeless search.’
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length
of Wilderland, down even to the Mountains of Shadow andthe fences of Mordor. ‘There we had rumour of him, and weguess that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we neverfound him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair Ithought again of a test that might make the ﬁnding of Gollumunneeded. The ring itself might tell if it were the One. Thememory of words at the Council came back to me: words of
328 the fellowship of the ring
Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard them now clearly
in my heart.
‘ ‘‘The Nine, the Seven, and the Three,’’ he said, ‘‘had each
their proper gem. Not so the One. It was round and
unadorned, as it were one of the lesser rings; but its maker setmarks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could still see and read.’’
‘What those marks were he had not said. Who now would
know? The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore
may be, it must have a source. What hand save Sauron’s everheld this thing, ere it was lost? The hand of Isildur alone.
‘With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly
to Gondor. In former days the members of my order hadbeen well received there, but Saruman most of all. Often hehad been for long the guest of the Lords of the City. Less
welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old,and grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoardedscrolls and books.
‘ ‘‘If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient
days, and the beginnings of the City, read on!’’ he said. ‘‘Forto me what was is less dark than what is to come, and that ismy care. But unless you have more skill even than Saruman,who has studied here long, you will ﬁnd naught that is notwell known to me, who am master of the lore of this City.’’
‘So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many
records that few even of the lore-masters now can read, fortheir scripts and tongues have become dark to later men. AndBoromir, there lies in Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, byany save Saruman and myself since the kings failed, a scrollthat Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march awaystraight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.’
‘Some in the North, maybe,’ Boromir broke in. ‘All know
in Gondor that he went ﬁrst to Minas Anor and dwelt awhile with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before hecommitted to him the rule of the South Kingdom. In thattime he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree inmemory of his brother.’
‘But in that time also he made this scroll,’ said Gandalf;
the council of elrond 329
‘and that is not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For
this scroll concerns the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the
North Kingdom; but records of it shall be left in Gondor,
where also dwell the heirs of Elendil, lest a time come when
the memory of these great matters shall grow dim.
‘And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as hefound it.
It was hot when I ﬁrst took it, hot as a glede, and my
hand was scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be
free of the pain of it. Yet even as I write it is cooled, and itseemeth to shrink, though it loseth neither its beauty nor itsshape. Already the writing upon it, which at ﬁrst was asclear as red ﬂame, fadeth and is now only barely to beread. It is fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for theyhave no letters in Mordor for such subtle work; but thelanguage is unknown to me. I deem it to be a tongue of theBlack Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it saithI do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fadebeyond recall. The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat ofSauron’s hand, which was black and yet burned like ﬁre,and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the goldmade hot again, the writing would be refreshed. But formy part I will risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works ofSauron the only fair. It is precious to me, though I buy itwith great pain.
‘When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the
traced writing was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongueof Mordor and the servants of the Tower. And what was saidtherein was already known. For in the day that Sauron ﬁrstput on the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the Three, was awareof him, and from afar he heard him speak these words, andso his evil purposes were revealed.
330 the fellowship of the ring
‘At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went
northwards, messages came to me out of Lo ´rien that Aragorn
had passed that way, and that he had found the creature
called Gollum. Therefore I went ﬁrst to meet him and hearhis tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I darednot guess.’
‘There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. ‘If a man
must needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the
deadly ﬂowers of Morgul Vale, then perils he will have. I,too, despaired at last, and I began my homeward journey.And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought: themarks of soft feet beside a muddy pool. But now the trail wasfresh and swift, and it led not to Mordor but away. Along theskirts of the Dead Marshes I followed it, and then I had him.
Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the darkeve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with greenslime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I wasnot gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth thanthe marks of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all myjourney, the road back, watching him day and night, makinghim walk before me with a halter on his neck, gagged, untilhe was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him evertowards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave himto the Elves, for we had agreed that this should be done; andI was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank. For mypart I hope never to look upon him again; but Gandalf cameand endured long speech with him.’
‘Yes, long and weary,’ said Gandalf, ‘but not without
proﬁt. For one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed withthat which Bilbo has now told openly for the ﬁrst time; butthat mattered little, since I had already guessed it. But Ilearned then ﬁrst that Gollum’s ring came out of the GreatRiver nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that hehad possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. Thepower of the ring had lengthened his years far beyond theirspan; but that power only the Great Rings wield.
‘And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other
the council of elrond 331
test that I spoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here
seen held aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur
reported may still be read, if one has the strength of will toset the golden thing in the ﬁre a while. That I have done, andthis I have read:
Ash nazg durbatulu ˆk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg
thrakatulu ˆk agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.’
The change in the wizard’s voice was astounding. Sud-
denly it became menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A
shadow seemed to pass over the high sun, and the porch fora moment grew dark. All trembled, and the Elves stopped
their ears.
‘Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that
tongue in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as theshadow passed and the company breathed once more.
‘And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,’
answered Gandalf. ‘Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon,Master Elrond. For if that tongue is not soon to be heard inevery corner of the West, then let all put doubt aside that thisthing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the treasure ofthe Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a greatpart of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come thewords that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that theyhad been betrayed:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them, One Ring
to bring them all and in the Darkness bind them.
‘Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from
Gollum. He was loth to speak and his tale was unclear, butit is beyond all doubt that he went to Mordor, and there allthat he knew was forced from him. Thus the Enemy knowsnow that the One is found, that it was long in the Shire; andsince his servants have pursued it almost to our door, he soon
332 the fellowship of the ring
will know, already he may know, even as I speak, that we
have it here.’
All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. ‘He
is a small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in
mischief. What became of him? To what doom did you put
him?’
‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had
suffered much. There is no doubt that he was tormented,and the fear of Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I forone am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful Elves ofMirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardlyto be believed in one so lean and withered. He could work
much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not doubt thathe was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’
‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there
was great distress. ‘The tidings that I was sent to bring mustnow be told. They are not good, but only here have I learnedhow evil they may seem to this company. Sme ´agol, who is
now called Gollum, has escaped.’
‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. ‘That is ill news indeed. We
shall all rue it bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduilto fail in their trust?’
‘Not through lack of watchfulness,’ said Legolas; ‘but per-
haps through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisonerhad aid from others, and that more is known of our doingsthan we could wish. We guarded this creature day and night,at Gandalf’s bidding, much though we wearied of the task.But Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had notthe heart to keep him ever in dungeons under the earth,where he would fall back into his old black thoughts.’
‘You were less tender to me,’ said Glo ´in with a ﬂash of his
eyes, as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment inthe deep places of the Elven-king’s halls.
‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my
good Glo ´in. That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long
set right. If all the grievances that stand between Elves and
the council of elrond 333
Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as well abandon
this Council.’
Glo´in rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. ‘In the days
of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there
was a high tree standing alone far from the others which heliked to climb. Often we let him mount up to the highestbranches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at
the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come down, and theguards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned thetrick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with hishands; so they sat by the tree far into the night.
‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and star-
less, that Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them offafter some time; they were many and ﬁerce, but they came
from over the mountains, and were unused to the woods.When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone,and his guards were slain or taken. It then seemed plain to usthat the attack had been made for his rescue, and that he knewof it beforehand. How that was contrived we cannot guess; butGollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many. Thedark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon’s fallhave returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again anevil place, save where our realm is maintained.
‘We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail
among those of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into theForest, going south. But ere long it escaped our skill, and wedared not continue the hunt; for we were drawing nigh to DolGuldur, and that is still a very evil place; we do not go that way.’
‘Well, well, he is gone,’ said Gandalf. ‘We have no time to
seek for him again. He must do what he will. But he mayplay a part yet that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen.
‘And now I will answer Galdor’s other questions. What of
Saruman? What are his counsels to us in this need? This taleI must tell in full, for only Elrond has heard it yet, and thatin brief; but it will bear on all that we must resolve. It is thelast chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it has yet gone.
***
334 the fellowship of the ring
‘At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety
was on my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the
little land; for I had a foreboding of some danger, still hiddenfrom me but drawing near. There messages reached me tell-ing me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard ofthe Black Shadow a chill smote my heart. But I found nothingsave a few fugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that
on them sat a fear of which they would not speak. I turnedthen east and north and journeyed along the Greenway; andnot far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting on a bankbeside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It wasRadagast the Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,near the borders of Mirkwood. He is one of my order, but Ihad not seen him for many a year.
‘ ‘‘Gandalf!’’ he cried. ‘‘I was seeking you. But I am a
stranger in these parts. All I knew was that you might be
found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire.’’
‘ ‘‘Your information was correct,’’ I said. ‘‘But do not put
it that way, if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are nearthe borders of the Shire now. And what do you want withme? It must be pressing. You were never a traveller, unlessdriven by great need.’’
‘ ‘‘I have an urgent errand,’’ he said. ‘‘My news is evil.’’
Then he looked about him, as if the hedges might have ears.‘‘Nazgu ˆl,’’ he whispered. ‘‘The Nine are abroad again. They
have crossed the River secretly and are moving westward.They have taken the guise of riders in black.’’
‘I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.‘ ‘‘The Enemy must have some great need or purpose,’’
said Radagast; ‘‘but what it is that makes him look to thesedistant and desolate parts, I cannot guess.’’
‘ ‘‘What do you mean?’’ said I.‘ ‘‘I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for
news of a land called Shire.’’
‘‘ ‘TheShire,’’ I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise
might fear to withstand the Nine, when they are gatheredtogether under their fell chieftain. A great king and sorcerer
the council of elrond 335
he was of old, and now he wields a deadly fear. ‘‘Who told
you, and who sent you?’’ I asked.
‘ ‘‘Saruman the White,’’ answered Radagast. ‘‘And he told
me to say that if you feel the need, he will help; but you must
seek his aid at once, or it will be too late.’’
‘And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the
White is the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a
worthy Wizard, a master of shapes and changes of hue; andhe has much lore of herbs and beasts, and birds are especiallyhis friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of theEnemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestallhim. It was by the devices of Saruman that we drove him fromDol Guldur. It might be that he had found some weapons thatwould drive back the Nine.
‘ ‘‘I will go to Saruman,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘Then you must go now,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘for I have
wasted time in looking for you, and the days are runningshort. I was told to ﬁnd you before Midsummer, and that isnow here. Even if you set out from this spot, you will hardlyreach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. Imyself shall turn back at once.’’ And with that he mountedand would have ridden straight off.
‘ ‘‘Stay a moment!’’ I said. ‘‘We shall need your help, and
the help of all things that will give it. Send out messages toall the beasts and birds that are your friends. Tell them tobring news of anything that bears on this matter to Sarumanand Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc.’’
‘ ‘‘I will do that,’’ he said, and rode off as if the Nine were
after him.
‘I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very
far already that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and Ineeded to consider matters. I stayed the night in Bree, anddecided that I had no time to return to the Shire. Never didI make a greater mistake!
‘However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my
friend the innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn;
336 the fellowship of the ring
and I came at long last to the dwelling of Saruman. That is
far south in Isengard, in the end of the Misty Mountains, not
far from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you thatthat is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountainsand the northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the WhiteMountains of his home. But Isengard is a circle of sheer rocksthat enclose a valley as with a wall, and in the midst of that
valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was not made bySaruman, but by the Men of Nu ´menor long ago; and it is
very tall and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a workof craft. It cannot be reached save by passing the circle ofIsengard; and in that circle there is only one gate.
‘Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in
the wall of rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers
of the gate were on the watch for me and told me thatSaruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and the gateclosed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, thoughI knew no reason for it.
‘But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of
Saruman; and there he met me and led me up to his highchamber. He wore a ring on his ﬁnger.
‘ ‘‘So you have come, Gandalf,’’ he said to me gravely; but
in his eyes there seemed to be a white light, as if a coldlaughter was in his heart.
‘ ‘‘Yes, I have come,’’ I said. ‘‘I have come for your aid,
Saruman the White.’’ And that title seemed to anger him.
‘ ‘‘Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey!’’ he scoffed. ‘‘For
aid? It has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey soughtfor aid, one so cunning and so wise, wandering about thelands, and concerning himself in every business, whether itbelongs to him or not.’’
‘I looked at him and wondered. ‘‘But if I am not deceived,’’
said I, ‘‘things are now moving which will require the unionof all our strength.’’
‘ ‘‘That may be so,’’ he said, ‘‘but the thought is late in
coming to you. How long, I wonder, have you concealedfrom me, the head of the Council, a matter of greatest import?
the council of elrond 337
What brings you now from your lurking-place in the Shire?’’
‘ ‘‘The Nine have come forth again,’’ I answered. ‘‘They
have crossed the River. So Radagast said to me.’’
‘ ‘‘Radagast the Brown!’’ laughed Saruman, and he no
longer concealed his scorn. ‘‘Radagast the Bird-tamer! Rada-
gast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the witto play the part that I set him. For you have come, and that
was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,Gandalf the Grey, and rest from journeys. For I am Sarumanthe Wise, Saruman Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours!’’
‘I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed
white, were not so, but were woven of all colours, and if hemoved they shimmered and changed hue so that the eye wasbewildered.
‘ ‘‘I liked white better,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘White!’’ he sneered. ‘‘It serves as a beginning. White
cloth may be dyed. The white page can be overwritten; andthe white light can be broken.’’
‘ ‘‘In which case it is no longer white,’’ said I. ‘‘And he that
breaks a thing to ﬁnd out what it is has left the path ofwisdom.’’
‘ ‘‘You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you
take for friends,’’ said he. ‘‘I have not brought you hither tobe instructed by you, but to give you a choice.’’
‘He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he
were making a speech long rehearsed. ‘‘The Elder Days aregone. The Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days arebeginning. The time of the Elves is over, but our time is athand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we musthave power, power to order all things as we will, for that goodwhich only the Wise can see.
‘ ‘‘And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper!’’ he said,
coming near and speaking now in a softer voice. ‘‘I said we,
forweit may be, if you will join with me. A new Power is
rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us atall. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Nu ´menor. This
then is one choice before you, before us. We may join with
338 the fellowship of the ring
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that
way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for
those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friendswill also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may withpatience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. Wecan bide our time, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts,deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the
high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all thethings that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish,hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends.There need not be, there would not be, any real change inour designs, only in our means.’’
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, ‘‘I have heard speeches of this kind
before, but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from
Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I cannot think that youbrought me so far only to weary my ears.’’
‘He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering.
‘‘Well, I see that this wise course does not commend itselfto you,’’ he said. ‘‘Not yet? Not if some better way can becontrived?’’
‘He came and laid his long hand on my arm. ‘‘And why
not, Gandalf?’’ he whispered. ‘‘Why not? The Ruling Ring?If we could command that, then the Power would pass to us.
That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have manyeyes in my service, and I believe that you know where thisprecious thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine askfor the Shire, and what is your business there?’’ As he saidthis a lust which he could not conceal shone suddenly in hiseyes.
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, standing away from him, ‘‘only one
hand at a time can wield the One, and you know that well,so do not trouble to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I
would not give even news of it to you, now that I learn yourmind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmaskedyourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit toSauron, or to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others tooffer?’’
the council of elrond 339
‘He was cold now and perilous. ‘‘Yes,’’ he said. ‘‘I did not
expect you to show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but
I gave you the chance of aiding me willingly, and so savingyourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is to stayhere, until the end.’’
‘ ‘‘Until what end?’’‘ ‘‘Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I
may ﬁnd means to persuade you. Or until it is found in your
despite, and the Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters: todevise, say, a ﬁtting reward for the hindrance and insolenceof Gandalf the Grey.’’
‘ ‘‘That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,’’
said I. He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and heknew it.
‘They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of
Orthanc, in the place where Saruman was accustomed to
watch the stars. There is no descent save by a narrow stairof many thousand steps, and the valley below seems far away.I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been greenand fair, it was now ﬁlled with pits and forges. Wolves andorcs were housed in Isengard, for Saruman was mustering agreat force on his own account, in rivalry of Sauron and notin his service, yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung andwrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone onan island in the clouds; and I had no chance of escape, and
my days were bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but
little room in which to pace to and fro, brooding on thecoming of the Riders to the North.
‘That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from
the words of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I cameto Isengard I had heard tidings by the way that could not bemistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for my friends in theShire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had setforth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reachedRivendell before the deadly pursuit began. And both my fearand my hope proved ill-founded. For my hope was founded
340 the fellowship of the ring
on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was founded on the
cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fearmakes it. But in the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, itwas not easy to think that the hunters before whom all haveﬂed or fallen would falter in the Shire far away.’
‘I saw you!’ cried Frodo. ‘You were walking backwards
and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.’
Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. ‘It was only
a dream,’ said Frodo, ‘but it suddenly came back to me. I
had quite forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left theShire, I think.’
‘Then it was late in coming,’ said Gandalf, ‘as you will see.
I was in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree
that I have seldom been in such need, and do not bear suchmisfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a ﬂy in a spi-der’s treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders mayleave a weak thread.
‘At ﬁrst I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Rada-
gast had also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anythingwrong in his voice or in his eye at our meeting. If I had, Ishould never have gone to Isengard, or I should have gonemore warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealedhis mind and deceived his messenger. It would have beenuseless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagastto treachery. He sought me in good faith, and so persuadedme.
‘That was the undoing of Saruman’s plot. For Radagast
knew no reason why he should not do as I asked; and he rodeaway towards Mirkwood where he had many friends of old.And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, and theysaw many things: the gathering of wolves and the musteringof Orcs; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in thelands; and they heard news of the escape of Gollum. Andthey sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me.
‘So it was that when summer waned, there came a night
of moon, and Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great
the council of elrond 341
Eagles, came unlooked-for to Orthanc; and he found me
standing on the pinnacle. Then I spoke to him and he bore
me away, before Saruman was aware. I was far from Isengard,ere the wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me.
‘ ‘‘How far can you bear me?’’ I said to Gwaihir.‘ ‘‘Many leagues,’’ said he, ‘‘but not to the ends of the
earth. I was sent to bear tidings not burdens.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I must have a steed on land,’’ I said, ‘‘and a steed
surpassingly swift, for I have never had such need of haste
before.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan
sits in his halls,’’ he said; ‘‘for that is not very far off.’’ And Iwas glad, for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, theHorse-lords, dwell, and there are no horses like those that are
bred in that great vale between the Misty Mountains and theWhite.
‘ ‘‘Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think?’’
I said to Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken myfaith.
‘ ‘‘They pay a tribute of horses,’’ he answered, ‘‘and send
many yearly to Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yetunder the yoke. But if Saruman has become evil, as you say,then their doom cannot be long delayed.’’
‘He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now
I have lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more
brief. In Rohan I found evil already at work: the lies of
Saruman; and the king of the land would not listen to mywarnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I choseone much to my liking, but little to his. I took the best horsein his land, and I have never seen the like of him.’
‘Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; ‘and
it grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worseto learn that Sauron levies such tribute. It was not so whenlast I was in that land.’
‘Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. ‘It is a lie that
comes from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan, true and
342 the fellowship of the ring
valiant, our allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them
long ago.’
‘The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered
Aragorn. ‘Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who
knows what you will ﬁnd there, if ever you return?’
‘Not this at least,’ said Boromir, ‘that they will buy their
lives with horses. They love their horses next to their kin.
And not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermarkcome from the ﬁelds of the North, far from the Shadow, andtheir race, as that of their masters, is descended from the freedays of old.’
‘True indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘And there is one among them
that might have been foaled in the morning of the world. Thehorses of the Nine cannot vie with him; tireless, swift as the
ﬂowing wind. Shadowfax they called him. By day his coatglistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, and hepasses unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had anyman mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and sospeedily he bore me that I reached the Shire when Frodo wason the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan onlywhen he set out from Hobbiton.
‘But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I
heard tidings of the Riders, and though I gained on them dayby day, they were ever before me. They had divided theirforces, I learned: some remained on the eastern borders, notfar from the Greenway, and some invaded the Shire from thesouth. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I hadwords with old Gamgee. Many words and few to the point.He had much to say about the shortcomings of the newowners of Bag End.
‘ ‘‘I can’t abide changes,’’ said he, ‘‘not at my time of life,
and least of all changes for the worst.’’ ‘‘Changes for theworst,’’ he repeated many times.
‘ ‘‘Worst is a bad word,’’ I said to him, ‘‘and I hope you do
not live to see it.’’ But amidst his talk I gathered at last thatFrodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that ablack horseman had come to the Hill the same evening. Then
the council of elrond 343
I rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it in uproar,
as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I
came to the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken openand empty; but on the threshold there lay a cloak that hadbeen Frodo’s. Then for a while hope left me, and I did notwait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but Irode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it
went many ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to methat one or two had ridden towards Bree; and that way I went,for I thought of words that might be said to the innkeeper.
‘ ‘‘Butterbur they call him,’’ thought I. ‘‘If this delay
was his fault, I will melt all the butter in him. I will roast theold fool over a slow ﬁre.’’ He expected no less, and whenhe saw my face he fell down ﬂat and began to melt on the
spot.’
‘What did you do to him?’ cried Frodo in alarm. ‘He was
really very kind to us and did all that he could.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘Don’t be afraid!’ he said. ‘I did not bite,
and I barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news thatI got out of him, when he stopped quaking, that I embracedthe old fellow. How it had happened I could not then guess,but I learned that you had been in Bree the night before, andhad gone off that morning with Strider.
‘ ‘‘Strider!’’ I cried, shouting for joy.‘ ‘‘Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir,’’ said Butterbur, mistaking
me. ‘‘He got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and theytook up with him. They behaved very queer all the time theywere here: wilful, you might say.’’
‘ ‘‘Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!’’ said I.
‘‘It’s the best news I have had since Midsummer; it’s wortha gold piece at the least. May your beer be laid under anenchantment of surpassing excellence for seven years!’’ saidI. ‘‘Now I can take a night’s rest, the ﬁrst since I have forgot-ten when.’’
‘So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had
become of the Riders; for only of two had there yet been any
344 the fellowship of the ring
news in Bree, it seemed. But in the night we heard more.
Five at least came from the west, and they threw down the
gates and passed through Bree like a howling wind; andthe Bree-folk are still shivering and expecting the end of theworld. I got up before dawn and went after them.
‘I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what
happened. Their Captain remained in secret away south of
Bree, while two rode ahead through the village, and fourmore invaded the Shire. But when these were foiled in Breeand at Crickhollow, they returned to their Captain with tid-ings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, except bytheir spies. The Captain then sent some eastward straightacross country, and he himself with the rest rode along theRoad in great wrath.
‘I galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before
sundown on my second day from Bree – and they were there
before me. They drew away from me, for they felt the comingof my anger and they dared not face it while the Sun was inthe sky. But they closed round at night, and I was besiegedon the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Su ˆl. I was hard put
to it indeed: such light and ﬂame cannot have been seen onWeathertop since the war-beacons of old.
‘At sunrise I escaped and ﬂed towards the north. I could
not hope to do more. It was impossible to ﬁnd you, Frodo,in the wilderness, and it would have been folly to try with allthe Nine at my heels. So I had to trust to Aragorn. But Ihoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach Rivendellahead of you and send out help. Four Riders did indeedfollow me, but they turned back after a while and made forthe Ford, it seems. That helped a little, for there were onlyﬁve, not nine, when your camp was attacked.
‘I reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Hoarwell
and through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. Ittook me nearly ﬁfteen days from Weathertop, for I couldnot ride among the rocks of the troll-fells, and Shadowfaxdeparted. I sent him back to his master; but a great friendshiphas grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my
the council of elrond 345
call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell only two days
before the Ring, and news of its peril had already been
brought here – which proved well indeed.
‘And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond
and the others forgive the length of it. But such a thing hasnot happened before, that Gandalf broke tryst and did notcome when he promised. An account to the Ring-bearer of
so strange an event was required, I think.
‘Well, the Tale is now told, from ﬁrst to last. Here we all
are, and here is the Ring. But we have not yet come anynearer to our purpose. What shall we do with it?’
There was a silence. At last Elrond spoke again.‘This is grievous news concerning Saruman,’ he said; ‘for
we trusted him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous
to study too deeply the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill.But such falls and betrayals, alas, have happened before. Ofthe tales that we have heard this day the tale of Frodo wasmost strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbohere; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone andsingular as I had thought him. The world has changed muchsince I last was on the westward roads.
‘The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the
Old Forest many tales have been told: all that now remainsis but an outlier of its northern march. Time was when asquirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now the Shireto Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once,and many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgottenBombadil, if indeed this is still the same that walked thewoods and hills long ago, and even then was older than theold. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we calledhim, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he hassince been given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Oraldby Northern Men, and other names beside. He is a strangecreature, but maybe I should have summoned him to ourCouncil.’
‘He would not have come,’ said Gandalf.
346 the fellowship of the ring
‘Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his
help?’ asked Erestor. ‘It seems that he has a power even over
the Ring.’
‘No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Say rather that
the Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. Buthe cannot alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others.And now he is withdrawn into a little land, within bounds
that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhapsfor a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.’
‘But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,’
said Erestor. ‘Would he not take the Ring and keep it there,for ever harmless?’
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘not willingly. He might do so, if all the
free folk of the world begged him, but he would not under-
stand the need. And if he were given the Ring, he would soonforget it, or most likely throw it away. Such things have nohold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; andthat alone is answer enough.’
‘But in any case,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘to send the Ring to him
would only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. Wecould not now take it back to him, unguessed, unmarked byany spy. And even if we could, soon or late the Lord of theRings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all hispower towards it. Could that power be deﬁed by Bombadilalone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all else is con-quered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and thenNight will come.’
‘I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; ‘but
Glorﬁndel, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is notin him, unless such power is in the earth itself. And yet wesee that Sauron can torture and destroy the very hills.What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, orwith Cı ´rdan at the Havens, or in Lo ´rien. But have they the
strength, have we here the strength to withstand the Enemy,the coming of Sauron at the last, when all else is overthrown?’
‘I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; ‘neither have they.’‘Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by
the council of elrond 347
strength,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘two things only remain for us to
attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.’
‘But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it
by any craft that we here possess,’ said Elrond. ‘And they
who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good orill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell hereto deal with it.’
‘Then,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘let us cast it into the deeps, and
so make the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now
that even at the Council his feet were already on a crookedpath. He knew that the Ring was not lost for ever, but wishedus to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yet oftin lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.’
‘Not safe for ever,’ said Gandalf. ‘There are many things
in the deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is
not our part here to take thought only for a season, or for afew lives of Men, or for a passing age of the world. We shouldseek a ﬁnal end of this menace, even if we do not hope tomake one.’
‘And that we shall not ﬁnd on the roads to the Sea,’ said
Galdor. ‘If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous,then ﬂight to the Sea is now fraught with gravest peril. Myheart tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the westernway, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. TheNine have been unhorsed indeed, but that is but a respite,ere they ﬁnd new steeds and swifter. Only the waning mightof Gondor stands now between him and a march in poweralong the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailingthe White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves mayhave no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.’
‘Long yet will that march be delayed,’ said Boromir.
‘Gondor wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even theend of its strength is still very strong.’
‘And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,’
said Galdor. ‘And other roads he may ﬁnd that Gondor doesnot guard.’
348 the fellowship of the ring
‘Then,’ said Erestor, ‘there are but two courses, as Glor-
ﬁndel already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to
unmake it. But both are beyond our power. Who will readthis riddle for us?’
‘None here can do so,’ said Elrond gravely. ‘At least none
can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road orthat. But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we
must take. The westward road seems easiest. Therefore itmust be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elveshave ﬂed that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road,a road unforeseen. There lies our hope, if hope it be. To walkinto peril – to Mordor. We must send the Ring to the Fire.’
Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking
out upon a sunlit valley ﬁlled with the noise of clear waters,
felt a dead darkness in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodolooked at him. He was ﬁngering his great horn and frowning.At length he spoke.
‘I do not understand all this,’ he said. ‘Saruman is a traitor,
but did he not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speakever of hiding and destroying? Why should we not think thatthe Great Ring has come into our hands to serve us in thevery hour of need? Wielding it the Free Lords of the Freemay surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears,I deem.
‘The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never sub-
mit; but they may be beaten down. Valour needs ﬁrststrength, and then a weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon,if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth tovictory!’
‘Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ‘We cannot use the Ruling Ring.
That we now know too well. It belongs to Sauron and wasmade by him alone, and is altogether evil. Its strength,Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at will, save onlythose who have already a great power of their own. But forthem it holds an even deadlier peril. The very desire of itcorrupts the heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise
the council of elrond 349
should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using
his own arts, he would then set himself on Sauron’s throne,
and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is anotherreason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is inthe world it will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing isevil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fear to takethe Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.’
‘Nor I,’ said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head.
‘So be it,’ he said. ‘Then in Gondor we must trust to suchweapons as we have. And at the least, while the Wise onesguard this Ring, we will ﬁght on. Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide – if the hand that wieldsit has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the
Kings of Men.’
‘Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test
one day.’
‘May the day not be too long delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘For
though I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort usto know that others fought also with all the means that theyhave.’
‘Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. ‘For there are other
powers and realms that you know not, and they are hiddenfrom you. Anduin the Great ﬂows past many shores, ere itcomes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.’
‘Still it might be well for all,’ said Glo ´in the Dwarf, ‘if all
these strengths were joined, and the powers of each wereused in league. Other rings there may be, less treacherous,that might be used in our need. The Seven are lost to us – ifBalin has not found the ring of Thro ´r, which was the last;
naught has been heard of it since Thro ´r perished in Moria.
Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope to ﬁndthat ring that Balin went away.’
‘Balin will ﬁnd no ring in Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Thro ´r
gave it to Thra ´in his son, but not Thra ´in to Thorin. It was
taken with torment from Thra ´in in the dungeons of Dol
Guldur. I came too late.’
350 the fellowship of the ring
‘Ah, alas!’ cried Glo ´in. ‘When will the day come of our
revenge? But still there are the Three. What of the Three
Rings of the Elves? Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not theElf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by the DarkLord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will theynot say?’
The Elves returned no answer. ‘Did you not hear me,
Glo´in?’ said Elrond. ‘The Three were not made by Sauron,
nor did he ever touch them. But of them it is not permitted
to speak. So much only in this hour of doubt I may now say.They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons ofwar or conquest: that is not their power. Those who madethem did not desire strength or domination or hoardedwealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve
all things unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earthhave in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But allthat has been wrought by those who wield the Three will turnto their undoing, and their minds and hearts will becomerevealed to Sauron, if he regains the One. It would be betterif the Three had never been. That is his purpose.’
‘But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were
destroyed, as you counsel?’ asked Glo ´in.
‘We know not for certain,’ answered Elrond sadly. ‘Some
hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched,would then become free, and their rulers might heal the hurtsof the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the Onehas gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fadeand be forgotten. That is my belief.’
‘Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,’ said
Glorﬁndel, ‘if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, andthe fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.’
‘Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,’
said Erestor, ‘and yet we come no nearer. What strength havewe for the ﬁnding of the Fire in which it was made? That isthe path of despair. Of folly I would say, if the long wisdomof Elrond did not forbid me.’
‘Despair, or folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is not despair, for
the council of elrond 351
despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt.
We do not. It is wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other
courses have been weighed, though as folly it may appear tothose who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, aveil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, andweighs all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. Butthe only measure that he knows is desire, desire for power;
and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will notenter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we mayseek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out ofreckoning.’
‘At least for a while,’ said Elrond. ‘The road must be trod,
but it will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom willcarry us far upon it. This quest may be attempted by the
weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet such is oft thecourse of deeds that move the wheels of the world: smallhands do them because they must, while the eyes of the greatare elsewhere.’
‘Very well, very well, Master Elrond!’ said Bilbo suddenly.
‘Say no more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at.Bilbo the silly hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had betterﬁnish it, or himself. I was very comfortable here, and gettingon with my book. If you want to know, I am just writing anending for it. I had thought of putting: and he lived happily
ever afterwards to the end of his days . It is a good ending, and
none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall haveto alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anywaythere will evidently have to be several more chapters, if I liveto write them. It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I tostart?’
Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died
on his lips when he saw that all the others regarded the oldhobbit with grave respect. Only Glo ´in smiled, but his smile
came from old memories.
‘Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you had really
started this affair, you might be expected to ﬁnish it. But you
352 the fellowship of the ring
know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for
any, and that only a small part is played in great deeds by
any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant,and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiantoffer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot takethis thing back. It has passed on. If you need my advice anylonger, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a
recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered!There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, whenthey come back.’
Bilbo laughed. ‘I have never known you give me pleasant
advice before,’ he said. ‘As all your unpleasant advice hasbeen good, I wonder if this advice is not bad. Still, I don’tsuppose I have the strength or luck left to deal with the Ring.
It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you meanbythey?’
‘The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’‘Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what
this Council has to decide, and all that it has to decide.Elves may thrive on speech alone, and Dwarves endure greatweariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and I miss my mealat noon. Can’t we think of some names now? Or put it offtill after dinner?’
No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke.
Frodo glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to
him. All the Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep
thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he was awaiting thepronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen andvainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelm-ing longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo’s side inRivendell ﬁlled all his heart. At last with an effort he spoke,and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other willwas using his small voice.
‘I will take the Ring,’ he said, ‘though I do not know the
way.’
***
the council of elrond 353
Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt
his heart pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. ‘If I
understand aright all that I have heard,’ he said, ‘I think thatthis task is appointed for you, Frodo; and that if you do notﬁnd a way, no one will. This is the hour of the Shire-folk,when they arise from their quiet ﬁelds to shake the towersand counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise could have
foreseen it? Or, if they are wise, why should they expect toknow it, until the hour has struck?
‘But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it
on another. I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, Iwill say that your choice is right; and though all the mightyElf-friends of old, Hador, and Hu ´rin, and Tu ´rin, and Beren
himself were assembled together, your seat should be among
them.’
‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried
Sam, unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping upfrom the corner where he had been quietly sitting on theﬂoor.
‘No indeed!’ said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile.
‘You at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separateyou from him, even when he is summoned to a secret counciland you are not.’
Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we
have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking hishead.
Chapter 3
THE RING GOES SOUTH
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in
Bilbo’s room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when theyheard that Sam had crept into the Council, and had been
chosen as Frodo’s companion.
‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him
out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards
him for his cheek!’
‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe pun-
ishment. You are not thinking what you are saying: con-
demned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward? YesterdayI dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, along while, perhaps for good.’
‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But
we are envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will
be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even inRivendell. We have come a long way with you and beenthrough some stiff times. We want to go on.’
‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to
stick together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain meup. There must be someone with intelligence in the party.’
‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’
said Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was nearthe ground. ‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecess-arily. Nothing is decided yet.’
‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all
doing? You were shut up for hours.’
‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and every-
one had an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s
bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop,
though he passed it off.’
the ring goes south 355
‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I
had already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know,
the only real eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo;and I was the only one that was not surprised.’
‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond
choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time thatit might come to that, if I was let off. But if you ask me,
Elrond will send out a fair number, when the reports comein. Have they started yet, Gandalf?’
‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent
out already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves,and they will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe withThranduil’s folk in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has gone withElrond’s sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for
many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up,Frodo! You will probably make quite a long stay here.’
‘Ah!’ said Sam gloomily. ‘We’ll just wait long enough for
winter to come.’
‘That can’t be helped,’ said Bilbo. ‘It’s your fault partly,
Frodo my lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funnyway of honouring it, I can’t help thinking. Notthe day I
should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s into Bag End. Butthere it is: you can’t wait now till spring; and you can’t go tillthe reports come back.
When winter ﬁrst begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
’tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.’
‘I am afraid it will,’ said Gandalf. ‘We can’t start until we
have found out about the Riders.’
‘I thought they were all destroyed in the ﬂood,’ said Merry.‘You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,’ said Gandalf.
‘The power of their master is in them, and they stand or fallby him. We hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked,
356 the fellowship of the ring
and so made for a while less dangerous; but we must ﬁnd out
for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to helpyou; but I will whisper this in your ears. Someone said thatintelligence would be needed in the party. He was right. Ithink I shall come with you.’
So great was Frodo’s delight at this announcement that
Gandalf left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and
took off his hat and bowed. ‘I only said I think I shall come .
Do not count on anything yet. In this matter Elrond will havemuch to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,I want to see Elrond. I must be off.’
‘How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to
Bilbo when Gandalf had gone.
‘Oh, I don’t know. I can’t count days in Rivendell,’ said
Bilbo. ‘But quite long, I should think. We can have many a
good talk. What about helping me with my book, and makinga start on the next? Have you thought of an ending?’
‘Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,’ said Frodo.‘Oh, that won’t do!’ said Bilbo. ‘Books ought to have good
endings. How would this do: and they all settled down and
lived together happily ever after ?’
‘It will do well, if it ever comes to that,’ said Frodo.‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And where will they live? That’s what I
often wonder.’
For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the
past journey and of the perils that lay ahead; but such wasthe virtue of the land of Rivendell that soon all fear andanxiety was lifted from their minds. The future, good or ill,was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over thepresent. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they werecontent with each good day as it came, taking pleasure inevery meal, and in every word and song.
So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright
and fair, and each evening followed cool and clear. Butautumn was waning fast; slowly the golden light faded to pale
the ring goes south 357
silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the naked trees. A
wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the
east. The Hunter’s Moon waxed round in the night sky, andput to ﬂight all the lesser stars. But low in the South one starshone red. Every night, as the Moon waned again, it shonebrighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his window,deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.
The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of
Elrond, and November had gone by with the last shreds ofautumn, and December was passing, when the scouts beganto return. Some had gone north beyond the springs of theHoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west, and
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched thelands far down the Greyﬂood, as far as Tharbad, where theold North Road crossed the river by a ruined town. Manyhad gone east and south; and some of these had crossed theMountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbedthe pass at the sources of the Gladden River, and had comedown into Wilderland and over the Gladden Fields and so atlength had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel.Radagast was not there; and they had returned over the highpass that was called the Redhorn Gate. The sons of Elrond,Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to return; they had made agreat journey, passing down the Silverlode into a strangecountry, but of their errand they would not speak to any saveto Elrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or
tidings of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Evenfrom the Eagles of the Misty Mountains they had learned nofresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; butthe wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting againfar up the Great River. Three of the black horses had beenfound at once drowned in the ﬂooded Ford. On the rocks ofthe rapids below it searchers discovered the bodies of ﬁvemore, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered. Of
358 the fellowship of the ring
the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere
was their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished
from the North.
‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said
Gandalf. ‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we mayhope now that the Ringwraiths were scattered, and have beenobliged to return as best they could to their Master in Mordor,
empty and shapeless.
‘If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the
hunt again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but theywill have to journey all the way to the borders of Rivendellbefore they can pick up our trail. And if we are careful thatwill be hard to ﬁnd. But we must delay no longer.’
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely
at Frodo. ‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set
out, it must go soon. But those who go with it must not counton their errand being aided by war or force. They must passinto the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you still holdto your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?’
‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’
said Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and howyour task is to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow hascrept now to the feet of the Mountains, and draws nigh evento the borders of the Greyﬂood; and under the Shadow all isdark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and somedisguised; and you may ﬁnd friends upon your way whenyou least look for it. I will send out messages, such as I cancontrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but soperilous are the lands now become that some may well mis-carry, or come no quicker than you yourself.
‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far
as they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, sinceyour hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves inarmour of the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arousethe power of Mordor.
the ring goes south 359
‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine
Walkers shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil.
With you and your faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for thisshall be his great task, and maybe the end of his labours.
‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of
the World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be forthe Elves; and Gimli son of Glo ´in for the Dwarves. They are
willing to go at least to the passes of the Mountains, and
maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son ofArathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.’
‘Strider!’ cried Frodo.‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be
your companion, Frodo.’
‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I
thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.’
‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken
shall be re-forged ere I set out to war. But your road and our
road lie together for many hundreds of miles. There-fore Boromir will also be in the Company. He is a valiantman.’
‘There remain two more to be found,’ said Elrond. ‘These
I will consider. Of my household I may ﬁnd some that itseems good to me to send.’
‘But that will leave no place for us!’ cried Pippin in dismay.
‘We don’t want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.’
‘That is because you do not understand and cannot
imagine what lies ahead,’ said Elrond.
‘Neither does Frodo,’ said Gandalf, unexpectedly support-
ing Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that ifthese hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare togo. But they would still wish to go, or wish that they dared,and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in thismatter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship thanto great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an Elf-lord, suchas Glorﬁndel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor openthe road to the Fire by the power that is in him.’
‘You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The
360 the fellowship of the ring
Shire, I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two
I had thought to send back there as messengers, to do what
they could, according to the fashion of their country, to warnthe people of their danger. In any case, I judge that theyounger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. Myheart is against his going.’
‘Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison,
or send me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise
I shall follow the Company.’
‘Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed.
‘Now the tale of Nine is ﬁlled. In seven days the Companymust depart.’
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths,
and on its blade was traced a device of seven stars set between
the crescent Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them waswritten many runes; for Aragorn son of Arathorn was goingto war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was thatsword when it was made whole again; the light of the sunshone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone cold, andits edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a new nameand called it Andu ´ril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of
their road and the perils they would meet; and they ponderedthe storied and ﬁgured maps and books of lore that were inthe house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with them; buthe was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent asmuch time as he could with Bilbo.
In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in
the Hall of Fire, and there among many tales they heard toldin full the lay of Beren and Lu ´thien and the winning of the
Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry and Pippin wereout and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilboin his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages fromhis book (which still seemed very incomplete), or scraps ofhis verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo,
the ring goes south 361
and the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden
box. He lifted the lid and fumbled inside.
‘Here is your sword,’ he said. ‘But it was broken, you know.
I took it to keep it safe but I’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths
could mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, youwould care to have this, don’t you know?’
He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby
leathern scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and
well-tended blade glittered suddenly, cold and bright. ‘Thisis Sting,’ he said, and thrust it with little effort deep intoa wooden beam. ‘Take it, if you like. I shan’t want it again,I expect.’
Frodo accepted it gratefully.‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which
seemed to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several
folds of old cloth, and held up a small shirt of mail. It wasclose-woven of many rings, as supple almost as linen, cold asice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit silver, andwas studded with white gems. With it was a belt of pearl andcrystal.
‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the
light. ‘And useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me.I got it back from Michel Delving before I started, and packedit with my luggage. I brought all the mementoes of my Jour-ney away with me, except the Ring. But I did not expect touse this, and I don’t need it now, except to look at sometimes.You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.’
‘I should look – well, I don’t think I should look right in it,’
said Frodo.
‘Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. ‘But never mind about
looks. You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on!You must share this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else!But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing it. Ihave a fancy it would turn even the knives of the BlackRiders,’ he ended in a low voice.
‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him,
and fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo
362 the fellowship of the ring
put over the top his old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and
jacket.
‘Just a plain hobbit you look,’ said Bilbo. ‘But there is more
about you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to
you!’ He turned away and looked out of the window, tryingto hum a tune.
‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all
your past kindnesses,’ said Frodo.
‘Don’t try!’ said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping
him on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to
slap! But there you are: Hobbits must stick together, andespecially Bagginses. All I ask in return is: take as much careof yourself as you can, and bring back all the news you can,and any old songs and tales you can come by. I’ll do my best
to ﬁnish my book before you return. I should like to write thesecond book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned to thewindow again, singing softly.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-ﬂowers and butterﬂies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.
the ring goes south 363
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East
Wind was streaming through the bare branches of the trees,
and seething in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds
were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As the cheerlessshadows of the early evening began to fall the Companymade ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrondcounselled them to journey under cover of night as often asthey could, until they were far from Rivendell.
‘You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’
he said. ‘I do not doubt that news of the discomﬁture of theRiders has already reached him, and he will be ﬁlled withwrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will be abroadin the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must bewareas you go on your way.’
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was
in secrecy not in battle. Aragorn had Andu ´ril but no other
weapon, and he went forth clad only in rusty green andbrown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a longsword, in fashion like Andu ´ril but of less lineage, and he bore
also a shield and his war-horn.
‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he
said, ‘and then let all the foes of Gondor ﬂee!’ Putting it tohis lips he blew a blast, and the echoes leapt from rock torock, and all that heard that voice in Rivendell sprang to theirfeet.
‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’
364 the fellowship of the ring
said Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of
your land, and dire need is on you.’
‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry
at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the
shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-
rings, for dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was
a broad-bladed axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and athis belt a long white knife. The younger hobbits wore theswords that they had taken from the barrow; but Frodo tookonly Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remainedhidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was theelven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay nowupon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes,
and they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food
and clothes and blankets and other needs were laden on apony, none other than the poor beast that they had broughtfrom Bree.
The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change
on him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth.It was Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring thatBill (as he called him) would pine, if he did not come.
‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if
he stayed here much longer. He gave me a look as plain asMr. Pippin could speak it: if you don’t let me go with you,Sam, I’ll follow on my own.’ So Bill was going as the beastof burden, yet he was the only member of the Company thatdid not seem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the ﬁre,
and they were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had notyet come out of the house. A gleam of ﬁrelight came fromthe open doors, and soft lights were glowing in manywindows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the door-step beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to hisknees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him.
the ring goes south 365
The others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and
staring moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily
below; his desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.
‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with
us. You could have stayed here and et the best hay till thenew grass comes.’ Bill swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over
anxiously in his mind all the things that he had stowed
in it, wondering if he had forgotten anything: his chieftreasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt thathe always carried and reﬁlled when he could; a good supplyof pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); ﬂintand tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of
his master’s that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowedto bring them out in triumph when they were called for. Hewent through them all.
‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you
said to yourself: ‘‘Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll wantit, if you haven’t got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he
called the Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he saidin a low voice. ‘The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Questof Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid: neither tocast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the
Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the
Company and the Council, and only then in gravest need.The others go with him as free companions, to help him onhis way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside intoother paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the lesseasy will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on youto go further than you will. For you do not yet know thestrength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what eachmay meet upon the road.’
‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’
said Gimli.
366 the fellowship of the ring
‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the
dark, who has not seen the nightfall.’
‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said
Gimli.
‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go
now with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves
and Men and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine
upon your faces!’
‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold.
‘I don’t suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo mylad, but I shall expect a full account when you get back. Anddon’t be too long! Farewell!’
Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows
and watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices.
There was no laughter, and no song or music. At last theyturned away and faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long
steep paths that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; andthey came at length to the high moor where the wind hissedthrough the heather. Then with one glance at the LastHomely House twinkling below them they strode away farinto the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning
southwards went on by narrow paths among the folded lands.
Their purpose was to hold this course west of the Mountains
for many miles and days. The country was much rougherand more barren than in the green vale of the Great River inWilderland on the other side of the range, and their goingwould be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape thenotice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hithertoseldom been seen in this empty country, and the paths werelittle known except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who
knew this land even in the dark. The others were in ﬁlebehind, and Legolas whose eyes were keen was the rearguard.
the ring goes south 367
The ﬁrst part of their journey was hard and dreary, and Frodo
remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, andno garment seemed able to keep out its searching ﬁngers.Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm,either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during themiddle of the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden
under the tangled thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in manyplaces. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch,and took their chief meal: cold and cheerless as a rule, forthey could seldom risk the lighting of a ﬁre. In the eveningthey went on again, always as nearly southward as they couldﬁnd a way.
At ﬁrst it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked
and stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping for-
ward like snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the landlooked much the same as it had the day before. Yet steadilythe mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell theyrose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet ofthe main range there was tumbled an ever wider land of bleakhills, and deep valleys ﬁlled with turbulent waters. Paths werefew and winding, and led them often only to the edge ofsome sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather
changed. The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to
the south. The swift-ﬂowing clouds lifted and melted away,
and the sun came out, pale and bright. There came a coldclear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. Thetravellers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been built outof the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone andtheir berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty
mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that theCompany was taking. At the left of this high range rose threepeaks; the tallest and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with
368 the fellowship of the ring
snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still largely in
the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed
red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his
hand. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached theborders of the country that Men call Hollin; many Elves livedhere in happier days, when Eregion was its name. Five-and-
forty leagues as the crow ﬂies we have come, though manylong miles further our feet have walked. The land and theweather will be milder now, but perhaps all the moredangerous.’
‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said
Frodo, throwing back his hood and letting the morning lightfall on his face.
‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. ‘We must
have turned eastwards in the night.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear
light. Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west.
There are many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose younever thought to look at them?’
‘Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember
them. Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’
‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with
Legolas, and was gazing out before him with a strange lightin his deep eyes. ‘There is the land where our fathers workedof old, and we have wrought the image of those mountainsinto many works of metal and of stone, and into manysongs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak,Shathu ˆr.
‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking
life, but I know them and their names, for under them liesKhazad-du ˆm, the Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black
Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar,the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertineand Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol theGrey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathu ˆr.
‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their
the ring goes south 369
arms lies the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot for-
get: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call
Nanduhirion.’
‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf.
‘If we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, underthe far side of Caradhras, we shall come down by the DimrillStair into the deep vale of the Dwarves. There lies the
Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in its icysprings.’
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-za ˆram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold
are the springs of Kibil-na ˆla. My heart trembles at the thought
that I may see them soon.’
‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf!’ said
Gandalf. ‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay
in that valley. We must go down the Silverlode into the secretwoods, and so to the Great River, and then——’
He paused.‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry.‘To the end of the journey – in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘We
cannot look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the ﬁrst stageis safely over. I think we will rest here, not only today buttonight as well. There is a wholesome air about Hollin. Muchevil must befall a country before it wholly forgets the Elves,if once they dwelt there.’
‘That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were
of a race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees andthe grass do not now remember them. Only I hear the stoneslament them: deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high
they builded us; but they are gone . They are gone. They sought
the Havens long ago.’
That morning they lit a ﬁre in a deep hollow shrouded by
great bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrierthan it had been since they set out. They did not hurry tobed afterwards, for they expected to have all the night tosleep in, and they did not mean to go on again until theevening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless.
370 the fellowship of the ring
After a while he left the Company and wandered on to the
ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he waslistening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and lookeddown at the others laughing and talking.
‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are
you looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’
‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have
been in the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell
here now, but many other creatures live here at all times,especially birds. Yet now all things but you are silent. I canfeel it. There is no sound for miles about us, and your voicesseem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.’
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you
guess is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than sur-
prise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us,where people are so seldom seen or heard?’
‘I hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’
‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you
bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him,especially if the Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talkingaloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.’
It was Sam’s turn that day to take the ﬁrst watch, but
Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence
grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers
could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony’s tail and theoccasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Samcould hear his own joints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silencewas around him, and over all hung a clear blue sky, as theSun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark patchappeared, and grew, and drove north like ﬂying smoke in thewind.
‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam
in a whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazingintently at the sky; but before long Sam could see for himself
the ring goes south 371
what was approaching. Flocks of birds, ﬂying at great speed,
were wheeling and circling, and traversing all the land as if
they were searching for something; and they were steadilydrawing nearer.
‘Lie ﬂat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into
the shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds hadbroken away suddenly from the main host, and came, ﬂying
low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought they were a kindof crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense athrong that their shadow followed them darkly over theground below, one harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and
west, and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Thenhe sprang up and went and wakened Gandalf.
‘Regiments of black crows are ﬂying over all the land
between the Mountains and the Greyﬂood,’ he said, ‘and
they have passed over Hollin. They are not natives here; theyarecrebain out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do not know what
they are about: possibly there is some trouble away southfrom which they are ﬂeeing; but I think they are spying outthe land. I have also glimpsed many hawks ﬂying high up inthe sky. I think we ought to move again this evening. Hollinis no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’
‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf;
‘and how we can get over that without being seen, I cannotimagine. But we will think of that when we must. As formoving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you are right.’
‘Luckily our ﬁre made little smoke, and had burned low
before the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out
and not lit again.’
‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin.
The news: no ﬁre, and a move again by night, had beenbroken to him, as soon as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘Allbecause of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to a realgood meal tonight: something hot.’
‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf.
372 the fellowship of the ring
‘There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For
myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer
feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: it willget warmer as we get south.’
‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo.
‘But I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of thatFiery Mountain, and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I
thought at ﬁrst that this here Redhorn, or whatever its nameis, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair jaw-crackerdwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed nothing to Sam’smind, and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vastthat he was quite out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark
birds passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun
grew red they disappeared southwards. At dusk the Companyset out, and turning now half east they steered their coursetowards Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly red inthe last light of the vanished Sun. One by one white starssprang forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to
Frodo like the remains of an ancient road, that had once beenbroad and well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass.The Moon, now at the full, rose over the mountains, and casta pale light in which the shadows of stones were black. Manyof them looked to have been worked by hands, though nowthey lay tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the ﬁrst stir of dawn, and
the moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenlyhe saw or felt a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for amoment they faded and then ﬂashed out again. He shivered.
‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf,
who was just ahead.
‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be
nothing, only a wisp of thin cloud.’
‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with
the wind.’
***
the ring goes south 373
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning
dawned even brighter than before. But the air was chill again;
already the wind was turning back towards the east. For twomore nights they marched on, climbing steadily but evermore slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and themountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morn-ing Caradhras rose before them, a mighty peak, tipped with
snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull red as ifstained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan.
The wind had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalfsnuffed the air and looked back.
‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn.
‘The heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is
lying far down their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on ourway high up towards the Redhorn Gate. We may well beseen by watchers on that narrow path, and waylaid by someevil; but the weather may prove a more deadly enemy thanany. What do you think of your course now, Aragorn?’
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that
Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing some debate that hadbegun long before. He listened anxiously.
‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end,
as you know well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perilsknown and unknown will grow as we go on. But we must goon; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the moun-tains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to theGap of Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news ofSaruman. Who knows which side now the marshals of theHorse-lords serve?’
‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another
way, and not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secretway that we have spoken of.’
‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to
the others, I beg, not until it is plain that there is no otherway.’
‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf.
374 the fellowship of the ring
‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the
others rest and sleep,’ said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were ﬁnishing their
breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and
stood looking at Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and
sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo watched them,wondering which way the debate would go. When theyreturned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knewthat it had been decided to face the weather and the highpass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the otherdark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemedto ﬁll Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had
been abandoned.
‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear
that the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I havedoubts of the weather that is coming up behind. Snow maycome. We must go with all the speed that we can. Even so itwill take us more than two marches before we reach the topof the pass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leaveas soon as you can get ready.’
‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was
born under the shadow of the White Mountains and knowsomething of journeys in the high places. We shall meet bittercold, if no worse, before we come down on the other side. Itwill not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death.When we leave here, where there are still a few trees andbushes, each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large ashe can bear.’
‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said
Sam. The pony looked at him mournfully.
‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood
– not unless it is a choice between ﬁre and death.’
The Company set out again, with good speed at ﬁrst; but
soon their way became steep and difﬁcult. The twistingand climbing road had in many places almost disappeared,
the ring goes south 375
and was blocked with many fallen stones. The night grew
deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter wind swirled among
the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of thegreat mountains. The narrow path now wound under a sheerwall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim ﬂanks ofCaradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the rightwas a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a
deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a
moment at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. Heput out his arm and saw the dim white ﬂakes of snow settlingon his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast,
ﬁlling all the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark
bent shapes of Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two aheadcould hardly be seen.
‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s
all right on a ﬁne morning, but I like to be in bed while it’sfalling. I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk mightwelcome it there.’ Except on the high moors of the North-farthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was regardedas a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit(save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311 , when
white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders;
it was already ankle-deep about his boots.
‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now,
Aragorn?’
‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than
other things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom fallsheavily so far south, save high up in the mountains. But weare not high yet; we are still far down, where the paths areusually open all the winter.’
‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said
Boromir. ‘They say in my land that he can govern the stormsin the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders ofMordor. He has strange powers and many allies.’
376 the fellowship of the ring
‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can
draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three
hundred leagues away.’
‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the
snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on
again. But they had not gone more than a furlong whenthe storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled andthe snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromirfound it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double,toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain that theycould not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli,as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as hetrudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an
agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerienoises in the darkness round them. It may have been only atrick of the wind in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall,but the sounds were those of shrill cries, and wild howls oflaughter. Stones began to fall from the mountain-side, whist-ling over their heads, or crashing on the path beside them.Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a greatboulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those
call it the wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; andthese stones are aimed at us.’
‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not
make what you say untrue. There are many evil andunfriendly things in the world that have little love for thosethat go on two legs, and yet are not in league with Sauron,but have purposes of their own. Some have been in this worldlonger than he.’
‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said
Gimli, ‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not beenheard in these lands.’
the ring goes south 377
‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his
attack,’ said Gandalf.
‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was
leaning on Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering.
‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is
no good going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly,
this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough
at the bottom of a long hard slope. We should have no shelterthere from snow, or stones – or anything else.’
‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said
Aragorn. ‘We have passed no place on the way up that offeredmore shelter than this cliff-wall we are under now.’
‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall
and no roof make a house.’
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff
as they could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it
leaned out a little, so that they hoped it would give themsome protection from the northerly wind and from the fallingstones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from everyside, and the snow ﬂowed down in ever denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the
pony stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits,and screened them a little; but before long the drifting snowwas above his hocks, and it went on mounting. If they hadhad no larger companions the hobbits would soon have been
entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking
fast into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a ﬁre was
heating his toes, and out of the shadows on the other side ofthe hearth he heard Bilbo’s voice speaking. I don’t think much
of your diary , he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth: there
was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo , Frodo answered with an
effort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back pain-fully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the groundout of a nest of snow.
378 the fellowship of the ring
‘This will be the death of the halﬂings, Gandalf,’ said
Boromir. ‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our
heads. We must do something to save ourselves.’
‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and
drawing out a leathern ﬂask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for allof us. It is very precious. It is miruvor , the cordial of Imladris.
Elrond gave it to me at our parting. Pass it round!’
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and
fragrant liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the
heavy drowsiness left his limbs. The others also revived andfound fresh hope and vigour. But the snow did not relent. Itwhirled about them thicker than ever, and the wind blewlouder.
‘What do you say to ﬁre?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The
choice seems near now between ﬁre and death, Gandalf.
Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes whenthe snow has covered us, but that will not help us.’
‘You may make a ﬁre, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If
there are any watchers that can endure this storm, then theycan see us, ﬁre or no.’
But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the
advice of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf tostrike a ﬂame that would hold amid the swirling wind or catchin the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf himself took ahand. Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, andthen with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he
thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it. At once a greatspout of green and blue ﬂame sprang out, and the woodﬂared and sputtered.
‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’
he said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can
read from Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or un-
friendly eyes. Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light ofthe ﬁre. The wood burned merrily; and though all round itthe snow hissed, and pools of slush crept under their feet,they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they
the ring goes south 379
stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing and blow-
ing ﬂames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces;
behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The ﬁre burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on.
‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not
far off.’
‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli.Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the
blackness. ‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the windis quieter.’
Frodo gazed wearily at the ﬂakes still falling out of the dark
to be revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying
ﬁre; but for a long time he could see no sign of their slacken-ing. Then suddenly, as sleep was beginning to creep overhim again, he was aware that the wind had indeed fallen, andthe ﬂakes were becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly a dimlight began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded
world. Below their refuge were white humps and domes andshapeless deeps beneath which the path that they had troddenwas altogether lost; but the heights above were hidden ingreat clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not
forgiven us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to ﬂing at us, ifwe go on. The sooner we go back and down the better.’
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difﬁcult. It
might well prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashesof their ﬁre the snow lay many feet deep, higher than theheads of the hobbits; in places it had been scooped and piledby the wind into great drifts against the cliff.
‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright ﬂame, he
might melt a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm hadtroubled him little, and he alone of the Company remainedstill light of heart.
‘If Elves could ﬂy over mountains, they might fetch the Sun
380 the fellowship of the ring
to save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to
work on. I cannot burn snow.’
‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must
serve, as we say in my country. The strongest of us must
seek a way. See! Though all is now snow-clad, our path, aswe came up, turned about that shoulder of rock down yonder.It was there that the snow ﬁrst began to burden us. If we
could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond.It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’
‘Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little
less in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led theway, and Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, andwere soon toiling heavily. In places the snow was breast-high,
and often Boromir seemed to be swimming or burrowingwith his great arms rather than walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his
lips, and then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest mustseek a way, say you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, butchoose an otter for swimming, and for running light overgrass and leaf, or over snow – an Elf.’
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed
as if for the ﬁrst time, though he had long known it, that theElf had no boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did,and his feet made little imprint in the snow.
‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to ﬁnd the Sun!’ Then
swift as a runner over ﬁrm sand he shot away, and quicklyovertaking the toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passedthem, and sped into the distance, and vanished round therocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until
Boromir and Aragorn dwindled into black specks in thewhiteness. At length they too passed from sight. The timedragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few ﬂakes ofsnow came curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer,
the ring goes south 381
and then at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same
time Boromir and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far
behind him and came labouring up the slope.
‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the
Sun. She is walking in the blue ﬁelds of the South, and a littlewreath of snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not atall. But I have brought back a gleam of good hope for those
who are doomed to go on feet. There is the greatest wind-driftof all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men werealmost buried. They despaired, until I returned and told themthat the drift was little wider than a wall. And on the otherside the snow suddenly grows less, while further down it isno more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’
‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary
storm. It is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves
and Dwarves, and that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’
‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have
Men with you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment.‘And doughty Men too, if I may say it; though lesser menwith spades might have served you better. Still, we havethrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may begrateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’
‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut
through the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all thehobbits.
‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have
some strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the littlefolk. The others no doubt will make shift to tread the pathbehind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will begin with you.’
He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my
arms,’ he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry camebehind. Pippin marvelled at his strength, seeing the passagethat he had already forced with no other tool than his greatlimbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening thetrack for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside ashe went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was ﬂung across
382 the fellowship of the ring
the mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest,
sharp as if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the
height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage hadbeen beaten, rising and falling like a bridge. On the far sideMerry and Pippin were set down, and there they waited withLegolas for the rest of the Company to arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in
the narrow but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading
Bill with Gimli perched among the baggage. Last cameAragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; buthardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deeprumble there rolled down a fall of stones and slithering snow.The spray of it half blinded the Company as they crouchedagainst the cliff, and when the air cleared again they saw that
the path was blocked behind them.
‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly
as we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of themountain seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisﬁedthat the invaders had been beaten off and would not dare toreturn. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds began to breakand the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became
steadily more shallow as they went down, so that even thehobbits could trudge along. Soon they all stood once moreon the ﬂat shelf at the head of the steep slope where they hadfelt the ﬁrst ﬂakes of snow the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place
they looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far awayin the tumble of country that lay at the foot of the mountainwas the dell from which they had started to climb the pass.
Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry;
and his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painfulmarch downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. Herubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the distancebelow him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dotswere circling in the air.
‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
the ring goes south 383
‘That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they
are good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must
go down at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras willwe wait for another night-fall!’
A cold wind ﬂowed down behind them, as they turned
their backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily downthe slope. Caradhras had defeated them.
Chapter 4
A JOURNEY IN THE DARK
It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast,
when they halted for the night. They were very weary. Themountains were veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was
cold. Gandalf spared them one more mouthful each of the
miruvor of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he
called a council.
‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The
attack on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must
rest here for a while.’
‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo.‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’
answered Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or toreturn to Rivendell.’
Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of
return to Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But
Aragorn and Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return
without shame – unless there is indeed no other way, and weare already defeated?’
‘You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit
defeat, and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now,then the Ring must remain there: we shall not be able to setout again. Then sooner or later Rivendell will be besieged,and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. TheRingwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadowsyet of the power and terror they would possess if the RulingRing was on their master’s hand again.’
‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a
sigh. Sam sank back into gloom.
‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I
a journey in the dark 385
thought from the beginning, when ﬁrst I considered this jour-
ney, that we should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I
have not spoken of it to the Company before. Aragorn wasagainst it, until the pass over the mountains had at least beentried.’
‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must
be evil indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about
it, and let us know the worst at once.’
‘The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering ﬁrewas in his eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mentionof that name. Even to the hobbits it was a legend of vaguefear.
‘The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it
will lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly.
‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the
need to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us
journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan,where men are friendly to my people, taking the road that Ifollowed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and crossthe Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come toGondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’
‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’
answered Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you ofSaruman? With him I may have business of my own ere allis over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if thatcan by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closedto us while we go with the Bearer.
‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We
might spend a year in such a journey, and we should passthrough many lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet theywould not be safe. The watchful eyes both of Saruman andof the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir,you were in the Enemy’s eyes only one stray wanderer fromthe South and a matter of small concern to him: his mindwas busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return nowas a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
386 the fellowship of the ring
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with
every league that we go south under the naked sky.
‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight
has become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope,
if we do not soon vanish from sight for a while, and coverour trail. Therefore I advise that we should go neither overthe mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is
a road at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us totake.’
‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may
watch all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moriawould be to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking atthe gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria isblack.’
‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken
Moria to the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I
alone of you have ever been in the dungeons of the DarkLord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur.Those who pass the gates of Barad-du ˆr do not return. But I
would not lead you into Moria if there were no hope ofcoming out again. If there are Orcs there, it may prove ill forus, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty Mountainswere scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies. TheEagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; butthere is a hope that Moria is still free.
‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that
in some deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may befound. However it may prove, one must tread the path thatneed chooses!’
‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf!’ said Gimli. ‘I will
go and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there– if you can ﬁnd the doors that are shut.’
‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will
seek the hidden doors together. And we will come through.In the ruins of the Dwarves, a dwarf’s head will be less easyto bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not bethe ﬁrst time that I have been to Moria. I sought there long
a journey in the dark 387
for Thra ´in son of Thro ´r after he was lost. I passed through,
and I came out again alive!’
‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly;
‘but though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I
do not wish to enter Moria a second time.’
‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin.‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam.
‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the ques-
tion is: who will follow me, if I lead you there?’
‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly.‘I will,’ said Aragorn heavily. ‘You followed my lead almost
to disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. Iwill follow your lead now – if this last warning does not moveyou. It is not of the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking
now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to you: if you pass thedoors of Moria, beware!’
‘I will notgo,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of
the whole Company is against me. What do Legolas and thelittle folk say? The Ring-bearer’s voice surely should beheard?’
‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas.The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last
Frodo spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do Iwish to refuse the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there shouldbe no vote, until we have slept on it. Gandalf will get voteseasier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom.How the wind howls!’
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the
wind hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was ahowling and wailing round them in the empty spaces of thenight.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’
he cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs havecome west of the Mountains!’
‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as
I said. The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who
388 the fellowship of the ring
now will wish to journey south by night with the wild wolves
on his trail?’
‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir.
‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some ﬁfteen
miles as the crow ﬂies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’answered Gandalf grimly.
‘Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’
said Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc
that one fears.’
‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath.
‘But where the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’
‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to
Sam. ‘I am no good after all. There is not enough of thebreed of Bandobras the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze
my blood. I don’t ever remember feeling so wretched.’
‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam.
‘But we aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk herewith us. Whatever may be in store for old Gandalf, I’ll wagerit isn’t a wolf’s belly.’
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the
top of the small hill under which they had been sheltering. Itwas crowned with a knot of old and twisted trees, aboutwhich lay a broken circle of boulder-stones. In the midst ofthis they lit a ﬁre, for there was no hope that darkness andsilence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting
packs.
Round the ﬁre they sat, and those that were not on guard
dozed uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated
where he stood. The howling of the wolves was now all roundthem, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off. In thedead of night many shining eyes were seen peering over thebrow of the hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones.At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape could beseen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke fromhim, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to theassault.
a journey in the dark 389
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff
aloft. ‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here.
Fly, if you value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail tosnout, if you come within this ring.’
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great
leap. At that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas hadloosed his bow. There was a hideous yell, and the leaping
shape thudded to the ground; the Elvish arrow had piercedits throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished.Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill wasdeserted; the hunting packs had ﬂed. All about them thedarkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was
setting, gleaming ﬁtfully through the breaking clouds. Sud-
denly Frodo started from sleep. Without warning a storm ofhowls broke out ﬁerce and wild all about the camp. A greathost of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attackingthem from every side at once.
‘Fling fuel on the ﬁre!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. ‘Draw
your blades, and stand back to back!’
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo
saw many grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. Moreand more followed. Through the throat of one huge leaderAragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a great sweepBoromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimlistood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-axe. Thebow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering ﬁrelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow:
he rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument ofsome ancient king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like acloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to meet thewolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossedthe blazing brand. It ﬂared with a sudden white radiance likelightning; and his voice rolled like thunder.
‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth! ’ he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him
390 the fellowship of the ring
burst into a leaf and bloom of blinding ﬂame. The ﬁre leapt
from tree-top to tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with
dazzling light. The swords and knives of the defenders shoneand ﬂickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the airas it ﬂew, and plunged burning into the heart of a greatwolf-chieftain. All the others ﬂed.
Slowly the ﬁre died till nothing was left but falling ash and
sparks; a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps,
and blew darkly from the hill, as the ﬁrst light of dawn camedimly in the sky. Their enemies were routed and did notreturn.
‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his
sword. ‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, andno mistake! Nearly singed the hair off my head!’
When the full light of the morning came no signs of
the wolves were to be found, and they looked in vain for the
bodies of the dead. No trace of the ﬁght remained but thecharred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on the hill-top.All were undamaged save one of which only the point wasleft.
‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary
wolves hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quicklyand go!’
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was
at the command of some power that had no longer any use
for snow, since they had retreated from the pass, a power
that wished now to have a clear light in which things thatmoved in the wild could be seen from far away. The windhad been turning through north to north-west during thenight, and now it failed. The clouds vanished southwardsand the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood uponthe hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over themountain-tops.
‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or
I fear we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our pathmay be winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has
a journey in the dark 391
seldom walked in this country, and only once have I been
under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.
‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to
where the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their
feet. In the distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs,and in their midst, taller than the rest, one great grey wall.‘When we left the pass I led you southwards, and not back
to our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It iswell that I did so, for now we have several miles less to cross,and haste is needed. Let us go!’
‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that
Gandalf will ﬁnd what he seeks, or that coming to the cliffwe shall ﬁnd the gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, andto be caught between wolves and the wall the likeliest chance.
Lead on!’
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was
he to come to Moria. Together they led the Company backtowards the mountains. The only road of old to Moria fromthe west had lain along the course of a stream, the Sirannon,that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doorshad stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the landhad changed in recent years; for he did not strike the streamwhere he looked to ﬁnd it, only a few miles southwards fromtheir start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Com-
pany wandered and scrambled in a barren country of redstones. Nowhere could they see any gleam of water or hearany sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts sank.They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; butwhat the night would bring, if it caught them in that lost land,none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to
them. He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right.Hurrying up they saw below them a deep and narrow chan-nel. It was empty and silent, and hardly a trickle of waterﬂowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed;
392 the fellowship of the ring
but on the near side there was a path, much broken and
decayed, that wound its way among the ruined walls and
paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the
stream ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it.But what has happened to the water, I cannot guess; it usedto be swift and noisy. Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged
doggedly along the rough and winding track for many miles.
The sun turned from the noon and began to go west. Aftera brief halt and a hasty meal they went on again. Before themthe mountains frowned, but their path lay in a deep troughof land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the
far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road,
which had been veering southwards between the brink of thechannel and a steep fall of the land to the left, turned andwent due east again. Rounding the corner they saw beforethem a low cliff, some ﬁve fathoms high, with a broken andjagged top. Over it a trickling water dripped, through a widecleft that seemed to have been carved out by a fall that hadonce been strong and full.
‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is
no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the StairFalls. If I remember right, there was a ﬂight of steps cut inthe rock at their side, but the main road wound away left andclimbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top.There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right upto the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon ﬂowed through itwith the road beside it. Let us go and see what things are likenow!’
They found the stone steps without difﬁculty, and Gimli
sprang swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo.When they reached the top they saw that they could go nofurther that way, and the reason for the drying up of theGate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun ﬁlled
a journey in the dark 393
the cool western sky with glimmering gold. Before them
stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset was reﬂected
on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed andhad ﬁlled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water werereared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light:ﬁnal and impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a ﬁssureor crack could Frodo see in the frowning stone.
‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing
across the water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a
time, the Elven Door at the end of the road from Hollin bywhich we have come. But this way is blocked. None of theCompany, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at theend of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’
‘We must ﬁnd a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli.
‘The ﬁrst thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the
main path and see where that will lead us. Even if there wereno lake, we could not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’
‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the
Mines,’ said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is adark road, and there are places narrow and steep which hecannot tread, even if we can.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And
poor Sam! I wonder what he will say?’
‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful
companion, and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now.I would have travelled lighter and brought no animal, least ofall this one that Sam is fond of, if I had had my way. I fearedall along that we should be obliged to take this road.’
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting
in the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, withall the speed they could, climbed up the slopes and reachedthe side of the lake. In breadth it looked to be no more thantwo or three furlongs at the widest point. How far it stretchedaway southward they could not see in the failing light; but itsnorthern end was no more than half a mile from where theystood, and between the stony ridges that enclosed the valley
394 the fellowship of the ring
and the water’s edge there was a rim of open ground. They
hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go before
they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf wasmaking for; and then he had still to ﬁnd the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake
they found a narrow creek that barred their way. It was greenand stagnant, thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclos-
ing hills. Gimli strode forward undeterred, and found thatthe water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at the edge.Behind him they walked in ﬁle, threading their way with care,for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy stones,and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgustat the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry
ground on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish,
followed by a plop, as if a ﬁsh had disturbed the still surfaceof the water. Turning quickly they saw ripples, black-edgedwith shadow in the waning light: great rings were wideningoutwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bub-bling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and thelast gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others
followed as quickly as they could. They reached the strip ofdry land between the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, oftenhardly a dozen yards across, and encumbered with fallen rockand stones; but they found a way, hugging the cliff, andkeeping as far from the dark water as they might. A milesouthwards along the shore they came upon holly trees.Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, theremains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had oncelined the road across the drowned valley. But close under thecliff there stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, largerthan any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined.Their great roots spread from the wall to the water. Underthe looming cliffs they had looked like mere bushes, whenseen far off from the top of the Stair; but now they toweredoverhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep night-shadows
a journey in the dark 395
about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the
road.
‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven-
way from Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of
that land, and they planted it here to mark the end of theirdomain; for the West-door was made chieﬂy for their use intheir trafﬁc with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier
days, when there was still close friendship at times betweenfolk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’
‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship
waned,’ said Gimli.
‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said
Legolas.
‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give
judgement now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at
least to be friends, and to help me. I need you both. Thedoors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we ﬁnd them thebetter. Night is at hand!’
Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will
you each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear wemust say farewell to our good beast of burden. You must layaside much of the stuff that we brought against bitter weather:you will not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we comethrough and journey on down into the South. Instead eachof us must take a share of what the pony carried, especiallythe food and the water-skins.’
‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken
place, Mr. Gandalf!’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘Iwon’t have it, and that’s ﬂat. After he has come so far andall!’
‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door
opens I do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside,into the long dark of Moria. You will have to choose betweenBill and your master.’
‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’
protested Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn himloose with all these wolves about.’
396 the fellowship of the ring
‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid
his hand on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go
with words of guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You area wise beast, and have learned much in Rivendell. Make yourways to places where you can ﬁnd grass, and so come in timeto Elrond’s house, or wherever you wish to go.
‘There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escap-
ing wolves and getting home as we have.’
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer.
Bill, seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled
up to him, putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst intotears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all the pony’spacks and throwing them on the ground. The others sortedout the goods, making a pile of all that could be left behind,
and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He
appeared to have done nothing. He was standing betweenthe two trees gazing at the blank wall of the cliff, as if hewould bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was wanderingabout, tapping the stone here and there with his axe. Legolaswas pressed against the rock, as if listening.
‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where
are the Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’
‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said
Gimli. ‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot ﬁndthem or open them, if their secret is forgotten.’
‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turninground. ‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that knowwhat to look for may discover the signs.’
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow
of the trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passedhis hands to and fro, muttering words under his breath. Thenhe stepped back.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but
they could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the
a journey in the dark 397
surface, where the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines
appeared, like slender veins of silver running in the stone. At
ﬁrst they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so ﬁnethat they only twinkled ﬁtfully where the Moon caught them,but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until their designcould be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of
interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the
threads were in places blurred or broken, the outline couldbe seen of an anvil and a hammer surmounted by a crownwith seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees, eachbearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shoneforth in the middle of the door a single star with many rays.
‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli.
‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas.‘And the Star of the House of Fe ¨anor,’ said Gandalf. ‘They
are wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moon-
light, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks wordsnow long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is long since I heardthem, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to mymind.’
‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying
to decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew theelf-letters, but I cannot read these.’
‘The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-
earth in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do notsay anything of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of
Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath
small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of
Hollin drew these signs. ’
‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter ?’ asked
Merry.
‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend,
speak the password, and the doors will open, and you canenter.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by
words. Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or
398 the fellowship of the ring

a journey in the dark 399
for particular persons; and some have locks and keys that are
still needed when all necessary times and words are known.
These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were notsecret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. Butif they were shut, any who knew the opening word couldspeak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not, Gimli?’
‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not
remembered. Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have
vanished from the earth.’
‘But do not youknow the word, Gandalf?’ asked Boromir
in surprise.
‘No!’ said the wizard.The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew
Gandalf well, remained silent and unmoved.
‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed
spot?’ cried Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the
dark water. ‘You told us that you had once passed throughthe Mines. How could that be, if you did not know how toenter?’
‘The answer to your ﬁrst question, Boromir,’ said the wiz-
ard, ‘is that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soonsee. And,’ he added, with a glint in his eyes under theirbristling brows, ‘you may ask what is the use of my deedswhen they are proved useless. As for your other question: doyou doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enterthis way. I came from the East.
‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open
outwards. From the inside you may thrust them open withyour hands. From the outside nothing will move them savethe spell of command. They cannot be forced inwards.’
‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted
by the wizard’s bristling brows.
‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said
Gandalf. ‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am alloweda little peace from foolish questions, I will seek for the openingwords.
‘I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men
400 the fellowship of the ring
or Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still
remember ten score of them without searching in my mind.
But only a few trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall nothave to call on Gimli for words of the secret dwarf-tonguethat they teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, likethe writing on the arch: that seems certain.’
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with
his staff the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the
anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but
the blank grey stone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or
varied them. Then he tried other spells, one after another,speaking now faster and louder, now soft and slow. Thenhe spoke many single words of Elvish speech. Nothing hap-pened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless starswere kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms
he spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro!
he cried, and struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he
shouted, and followed it with the same command in everylanguage that had ever been spoken in the West of Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat downin silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening
ears the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, andSam sprang to his side and whispered softly to him.
‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we
shall need him still, if the wolves do not ﬁnd us. How I hatethis foul pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone hecast it far into the dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant
a journey in the dark 401
there was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed
on the surface out beyond where the stone had fallen, and
they moved slowly towards the foot of the cliff.
‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this
place, too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not ofwolves, or the dark behind the doors, but of something else.I am afraid of the pool. Don’t disturb it!’
‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry.
‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin.Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head
bowed, either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournfulhowling of the wolves was heard again. The ripples on thewater grew and came closer; some were already lapping onthe shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang
to his feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course,
of course! Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you seethe answer.’
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a
clear voice: Mellon!
The star shone out brieﬂy and faded again. Then silently
a great doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint hadbeen visible before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swungoutwards inch by inch, until both doors lay back against thewall. Through the opening a shadowy stair could be seenclimbing steeply up; but beyond the lower steps the darknesswas deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder.
‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry,
of all people, was on the right track. The opening word wasinscribed on the archway all the time! The translation shouldhave been: Say ‘‘Friend’’ and enter . I had only to speak the
Elvish word for friend and the doors opened. Quite simple.
Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.Those were happier times. Now let us go!’
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step.
But at that moment several things happened. Frodo felt
402 the fellowship of the ring
something seize him by the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill
the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned tail and dashed
away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped afterhim, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran back again, weepingand cursing. The others swung round and saw the waters ofthe lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming upfrom the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it
was pale-green and luminous and wet. Its ﬁngered end had
hold of Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water.Sam on his knees was now slashing at it with a knife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying
out for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The darkwater boiled, and there was a hideous stench.
‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf
leaping back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to
have rooted all but Sam to the ground where they stood, hedrove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few
steps up, and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when thegroping tentacles writhed across the narrow shore and ﬁn-gered the cliff-wall and the doors. One came wriggling overthe threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned andpaused. If he was considering what word would close thegate again from within, there was no need. Many coiling armsseized the doors on either side, and with horrible strength,swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed,and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing camedully through the ponderous stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor oldBill! Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.I had to choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his
staff against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone andthe stairs trembled, but the doors did not open.
***
a journey in the dark 403
‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked
behind us now, and there is only one way out – on the other
side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that bouldershave been piled up, and the trees uprooted and thrown acrossthe gate. I am sorry; for the trees were beautiful, and hadstood so long.’
‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment
that my foot ﬁrst touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was
the thing, or were there many of them?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all
guided by one purpose. Something has crept, or has beendriven out of dark waters under the mountains. There areolder and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of theworld.’ He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on Frodo ﬁrst amongall the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone
magniﬁed the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear:‘In the deep places of the world! And thither we are goingagainst my wish. Who will lead us now in this deadly dark?’
‘I will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow
my staff!’
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held
his staff aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance.The wide stairway was sound and undamaged. Two hundred
steps they counted, broad and shallow; and at the top they
found an arched passage with a level ﬂoor leading on into thedark.
‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the
landing, since we can’t ﬁnd a dining-room!’ said Frodo. Hehad begun to shake off the terror of the clutching arm, andsuddenly he felt extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on
the upper steps, dim ﬁgures in the gloom. After they hadeaten, Gandalf gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of
Rivendell.
404 the fellowship of the ring
‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I
think we need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we
have great luck, we shall need all that is left before we see theother side! Go carefully with the water, too! There are manystreams and wells in the Mines, but they should not betouched. We may not have a chance of ﬁlling our skins andbottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’
‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo.
‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many
chances. But going straight, without mishap or losing ourway, we shall take three or four marches, I expect. It cannotbe less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in adirect line, and the road may wind much.’
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All
were eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and
were willing, tired as they were, to go on marching still forseveral hours. Gandalf walked in front as before. In his lefthand he held up his glimmering staff, the light of which justshowed the ground before his feet; in his right he held hissword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glintingin the dim light as he turned his head from side to side.Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the shortsword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or ofGlamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the workof Elvish smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone witha cold light, if any Orcs were near at hand. Behind Frodowent Sam, and after him Legolas, and the young hobbits,and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walkedAragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to
descend. It went steadily down for a long while before itbecame level once again. The air grew hot and stiﬂing, but itwas not foul, and at times they felt currents of cooler air upontheir faces, issuing from half-guessed openings in the walls.There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard’sstaff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches, and of other
a journey in the dark 405
passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down,
or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering
beyond hope of remembering.
Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage.
At least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled bythe mere darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted himat points where the choice of way was doubtful; but it was
always Gandalf who had the ﬁnal word. The Mines of Moriawere vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli,Glo´in’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To
Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before werenow of little help, but even in the gloom and despite allwindings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, andhe did not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards
his goal.
‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer
than usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together;the others were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do notbe afraid! I have been with him on many a journey, if neveron one so dark; and there are tales in Rivendell of greaterdeeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray– if there is any path to ﬁnd. He has led us in here againstour fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever cost tohimself. He is surer of ﬁnding the way home in a blind nightthan the cats of Queen Beru ´thiel.’
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide.
They had no fuel nor any means of making torches; in thedesperate scramble at the doors many things had been leftbehind. But without any light they would soon have come togrief. There were not only many roads to choose from, therewere also in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wellsbeside the path in which their passing feet echoed. Therewere ﬁssures and chasms in the walls and ﬂoor, and everynow and then a crack would open right before their feet. Thewidest was more than seven feet across, and it was longbefore Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over
406 the fellowship of the ring
the dreadful gap. The noise of churning water came up from
far below, as if some great mill-wheel was turning in the
depths.
‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I hadn’t got it!’
As these dangers became more frequent their march
became slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping
on, on, endlessly to the mountains’ roots. They were morethan weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thoughtof halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits had risen for a while afterhis escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; butnow a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept over himagain. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the knife-
stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. Hissenses were sharper and more aware of things that could notbe seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed wasthat he could see more in the dark than any of his com-panions, save perhaps Gandalf. And he was in any case thebearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against his breast,and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certaintyof evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. Hegripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in
hurried whispers. There was no sound but the sound of theirown feet: the dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavytread of Boromir; the light step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow ﬁrmfootfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they haltedfor a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it wereoccasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. YetFrodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard, somethingelse: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loudenough, or near enough, for him to feel certain that he heardit; but once it had started it never stopped, while the Companywas moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted itpattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
***
a journey in the dark 407
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines.
They had been going for several hours with only brief halts,
when Gandalf came to his ﬁrst serious check. Before himstood a wide dark arch opening into three passages: all led inthe same general direction, eastwards; but the left-hand pass-age plunged down, while the right-hand climbed up, and themiddle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very
narrow.
‘I have no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, stand-
ing uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in thehope of ﬁnding some marks or inscription that might helphis choice; but nothing of the kind was to be seen. ‘I am tooweary to decide,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘And I expectthat you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better
halt here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean!In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is ridingwestward and the middle-night has passed.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope
those wolves haven’t got him yet.’
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it
was half closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust.Beyond there seemed to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock.
‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin
pushed forward, glad to ﬁnd a place where they could restwith at least more feeling of shelter than in the open passage.‘Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I will go ﬁrst.’
He went in cautiously, and the others ﬁled behind. ‘There!’
he said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the ﬂoor.Before his feet they saw a large round hole like the mouth ofa well. Broken and rusty chains lay at the edge and traileddown into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near.
‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering
when you were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn toMerry. ‘Let the guide go ﬁrst while you have one.’
‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the
watching of the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole wasplainly a well for the guards’ use, covered with a stone lid.
408 the fellowship of the ring
But the lid is broken, and we must all take care in the dark.’
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others
were unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of
the chamber, as far as possible from the hole in the ﬂoor, hecrept to the edge and peered over. A chill air seemed to strikehis face, rising from invisible depths. Moved by a suddenimpulse he groped for a loose stone, and let it drop. He felt
his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Thenfar below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in somecavernous place, there came a plunk , very distant, but magni-
ﬁed and repeated in the hollow shaft.
‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin
confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippincould see his eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled.
‘This is a serious journey, not a hobbit walking-party. Throwyourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuis-ance. Now be quiet!’
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then
there came out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap ,tap-tom .
They stopped, and when the echoes had died away, theywere repeated: tap-tom ,tom-tap ,tap-tap ,tom. They sounded
disquietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while theknocking died away and was not heard again.
‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard
one,’ said Gimli.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have
nothing to do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probablysomething has been disturbed that would have been betterleft quiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again! Let us hope weshall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, cango on the ﬁrst watch, as a reward,’ he growled, as he rolledhimself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he
kept on turning round, fearing that some unknown thingwould crawl up out of the well. He wished he could coverthe hole, if only with a blanket, but he dared not move or gonear it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.
a journey in the dark 409
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent.
He was deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of
his former journey in the Mines, and considering anxiouslythe next course that he should take; a false turn now mightbe disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over toPippin.
‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a
kindly tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink,
so I may as well do the watching.’
‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat
down by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it sincethe morning before the snowstorm.’
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a
dark glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ﬂoor, shielding
a glowing chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. Theﬂicker for a moment showed his sharp nose, and the puff ofsmoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had
sat and watched all alone for about six hours, and had let theothers rest. ‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’he said. ‘I do not like the feel of the middle way; and I do notlike the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air downthere, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage.It is time we began to climb up again.’
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they
marched on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing,and saw nothing but the faint gleam of the wizard’s light,bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in front of them. The passagethey had chosen wound steadily upwards. As far as theycould judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it roseit grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings toother galleries or tunnels on either side, and the ﬂoor waslevel and sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they hadstruck what once had been an important road; and they wentforward quicker than they had done on their ﬁrst march.
In this way they advanced some ﬁfteen miles, measured in
410 the fellowship of the ring
a direct line east, though they must have actually walked
twenty miles or more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s
spirits rose a little; but he still felt oppressed, and still at timeshe heard, or thought he heard, away behind the Companyand beyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following foot-step that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure
without a rest, and all were thinking of a place where they
could sleep, when suddenly the walls to right and left van-ished. They seemed to have passed through some archeddoorway into a black and empty space. There was a greatdraught of warmer air behind them, and before them thedarkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded
anxiously together.
Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said.
‘At last we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess thatwe are not far now from the eastern side. But we are highup, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I ammistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a widehall. I will now risk a little real light.’
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze
like a ﬂash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and ﬂed,and for a second they saw a vast roof far above their headsupheld by many mighty pillars hewn of stone. Before themand on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black walls,polished and smooth as glass, ﬂashed and glittered. Threeother entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straightbefore them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the lightwent out.
‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said
Gandalf. ‘There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reachesof the Mines. I think we have reached them now, but it isnight outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If Iam right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peepingin. But in the meanwhile we had better go no further. Let
a journey in the dark 411
us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the
greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through
yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on theworld.’
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall,
huddled close together in a corner to escape the draught:
there seemed to be a steady inﬂow of chill air through theeastern archway. All about them as they lay hung the dark-ness, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by theloneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlesslybranching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings thatdark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether
short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
‘There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at
one time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier thanbadgers for ﬁve hundred years to make all this, and most inhard rock too! What did they do it all for? They didn’t livein these darksome holes surely?’
‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm
and city of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome,but full of light and splendour, as is still remembered in oursongs.’
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a
deep voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,No stain yet on the Moon was seen,No words were laid on stream or stoneWhen Durin woke and walked alone.He named the nameless hills and dells;He drank from yet untasted wells;He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,And saw a crown of stars appear,As gems upon a silver thread,Above the shadow of his head.
412 the fellowship of the ring
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in NargothrondAnd Gondolin, who now beyondThe Western Seas have passed away:The world was fair in Durin’s Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stoneWith golden roof and silver ﬂoor,And runes of power upon the door.The light of sun and star and moonIn shining lamps of crystal hewnUndimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;The delver mined, the mason built.There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,And metal wrought like ﬁshes’ mail,Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin’s folk;
Beneath the mountains music woke:The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge’s ﬁre is ashen-cold;No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls;The shadow lies upon his tombIn Moria, in Khazad-du ˆm.
But still the sunken stars appear
a journey in the dark 413
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria,
in Khazad-du ˆm!But it makes the darkness seem heavier,
thinking of all those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold
lying about here still?’
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no
more.
‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often
plundered Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. Andsince the dwarves ﬂed, no one dares to seek the shafts and
treasuries down in the deep places: they are drowned in water– or in a shadow of fear.’
‘Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked
Sam.
‘For mithril ,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wealth of Moria was
not in gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron,their servant. Such things they found here, it is true, especiallyiron; but they did not need to delve for them: all things thatthey desired they could obtain in trafﬁc. For here alone inthe world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some havecalled it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a
name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times that ofgold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground,and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes leadaway north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. TheDwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation
of their wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delvedtoo greedily and too deep, and disturbed that from whichthey ﬂed, Durin’s Bane. Of what they brought to light theOrcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute toSauron, who covets it.
‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper,
and polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it ametal, light and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty
414 the fellowship of the ring
was like to that of common silver, but the beauty of mithril
did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly loved it, and
among many uses they made of it ithildin , starmoon, which
you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-ringsthat Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of it?Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, Isuppose.’
‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet
of Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift!’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was
greater than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic
and touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to
think that he had been walking about with the price of the
Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubtthat Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. Butnow his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines,to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbowas still there. He wished with all his heart that he was backthere, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or potteringamong the ﬂowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, ormithril – or the Ring.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo
was on guard. As if it were a breath that came in throughunseen doors out of deep places, dread came over him. His
hands were cold and his brow damp. He listened. All his
mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slowhours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echoof a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed
that the western archway stood, he fancied that he could seetwo pale points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started.His head had nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep onguard,’ he thought. ‘I was on the edge of a dream.’ He stoodup and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering intothe dark, until he was relieved by Legolas.
a journey in the dark 415
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed
to him that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw
the two pale points of light approaching, slowly. He wokeand found that the others were speaking softly near him, andthat a dim light was falling on his face. High up above theeastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a longpale gleam; and across the hall through the northern arch
light also glimmered faint and distantly.
Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning
it is again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on theeast side of Moria. Before today is over we ought to ﬁndthe Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying inthe Dimrill Dale before us.’
‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and
it is very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we
have found no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balinever came here.’
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again
at once. ‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we areoutside,’ he said. ‘I think that none of us will wish to spendanother night in Moria.’
‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take?
Yonder eastward arch?’
‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly
where we are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are
above and to the north of the Great Gates; and it may not be
easy to ﬁnd the right road down to them. The eastern archwill probably prove to be the way that we must take; butbefore we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Letus go towards that light in the north door. If we could ﬁnd awindow it would help, but I fear that the light comes onlydown deep shafts.’
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern
arch. They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they wentalong it the glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it camethrough a doorway on their right. It was high and ﬂat-topped,
416 the fellowship of the ring
and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing half
open. Beyond it was a large square chamber. It was dimly lit,
but to their eyes, after so long a time in the dark, it seemeddazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the ﬂoor, and
stumbled among things lying in the doorway whose shapesthey could not at ﬁrst make out. The chamber was lit by a
wide shaft high in the further eastern wall; it slanted upwardsand, far above, a small square patch of blue sky could beseen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a table in themiddle of the room: a single oblong block, about two feethigh, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone.
‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards
with a curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it.
Gandalf came quickly to his side. On the slab runes weredeeply graven:

a journey in the dark 417
‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in
Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men
and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria .’
‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli
cast his hood over his face.
Chapter 5
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU ˆM
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of
Balin. Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship withthe dwarf, and of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that
dusty chamber in the mountains it seemed a thousand years
ago and on the other side of the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search
for anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, orshow what had become of his folk. There was another smaller
door on the other side of the chamber, under the shaft. Byboth the doors they could now see that many bones werelying, and among them were broken swords and axe-heads,and cloven shields and helms. Some of the swords werecrooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and
in them were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had
been broken and plundered; but beside the shattered lid ofone there lay the remains of a book. It had been slashedand stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained withblack and other dark marks like old blood that little of itcould be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leavescracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored overit for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli stand-ing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves,that they were written by many different hands, in runes,both of Moria and of Dale, and here and there in Elvishscript.
At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the
fortunes of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with
their coming to Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the
pages seem to have numbers referring to the years after their
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 419
arrival. The top page is marked one – three , so at least two
are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think;
the next word is blurred and burned: probably room – we slew
many in the bright – I think – sun in the dale. Flo ´i was killed by
an arrow. He slew the great . Then there is a blur followed by
Flo´i under grass near Mirror mere . The next line or two I
cannot read. Then comes We have taken the twentyﬁrst hall
of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft
is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of
Mazarbul. ’
‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is
where we now stand.’
‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf,
‘except the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm.
Then Balin is now lord of Moria . That seems to end a chapter.
After some stars another hand begins, and I can see we found
truesilver , and later the word wellforged , and then something,
I have it! mithril ; and the last two lines O´in to seek for the upper
armouries of Third Deep , something go westwards , a blur, to
Hollin gate .’
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are
several pages of the same sort, rather hastily written and
much damaged,’ he said; ‘but I can make little of them in thislight. Now there must be a number of leaves missing, because
they begin to be numbered ﬁve, the ﬁfth year of the colony,
I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I
cannot read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait!Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish script.’
‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the
wizard’s arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and oftenused the Elvish characters.’
‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said
Gandalf. ‘The ﬁrst clear word is sorrow , but the rest of the
line is lost, unless it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre
followed by day being the tenth of novembre Balin lord of Moria
420 the fellowship of the ring
fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in Mirror mere. an
orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, but many more
. . . up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page
is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I thinkI can read we have barred the gates , and then can hold them
long if , and then perhaps horrible andsuffer . Poor Balin! He
seems to have kept the title that he took for less than ﬁve
years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is notime to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page ofall.’ He paused and sighed.
‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel.
Listen! We cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken
the Bridge and second hall. Fra ´r and Lo ´ni and Na ´li fell there.
Then there are four lines smeared so that I can only read
went 5days ago . The last lines run the pool is up to the wall
at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took O ´in. We cannot
get out. The end comes , and then drums, drums in the deep .I
wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailingscrawl of elf-letters: they are coming . There is nothing more.’
Gandalf paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the
Company. ‘ We cannot get out ,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well
for us that the pool had sunk a little, and that the Watcherwas sleeping down at the southern end.’
Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to
have made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but therewere not many left by that time. So ended the attempt toretake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The time is not comeyet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin.Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take thisbook, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later.You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Da ´in, if
you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grievehim deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’
‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir.‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this
room has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 421
must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the
hall must be the twenty-ﬁrst of the North-end. Therefore we
should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear rightand south, and go downwards. The Twenty-ﬁrst Hall shouldbe on the Seventh Level, that is six above the level of theGates. Come now! Back to the hall!’
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came
a great noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths
far below, and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They
sprang towards the door in alarm. Doom ,doom it rolled again,
as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria into avast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great horn wasblown in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were
heard further off. There was a hurrying sound of many feet.
‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas.‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli.‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are,
caught, just as they were before. But I was not here then. Wewill see what——’
Doom ,doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And
keep your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chanceto cut our way out yet.’
‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the
east door ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were
coming down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter asthe Company drew their swords. Glamdring shone with apale light, and Sting glinted at the edges. Boromir set hisshoulder against the western door.
‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He
sprang forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to hisfull height.
‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of
Moria?’ he cried in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding
422 the fellowship of the ring
stones into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised
in command. Doom ,boom ,doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the nar-
row opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There
was a dazzling ﬂash that lit the chamber and the passageoutside. For an instant the wizard looked out. Arrows whinedand whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.
‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some
are large and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment
they are hanging back, but there is something else there. Agreat cave-troll, I think, or more than one. There is no hopeof escape that way.’
‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’
said Boromir.
‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who
was standing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on
this side plunges straight down a stair: it plainly does not leadback towards the hall. But it is no good ﬂying blindly thisway with the pursuit just behind. We cannot block the door.Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards.We must do something to delay the enemy ﬁrst. We willmake them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said grimly,feeling the edge of his sword, Andu ´ril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir ﬂung him-
self against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with
broken sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company
retreated to the other side of the chamber. But they had nochance to ﬂy yet. There was a blow on the door that made itquiver; and then it began to grind slowly open, driving backthe wedges. A huge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin ofgreenish scales, was thrust through the widening gap. Thena great, ﬂat, toeless foot was forced through below. Therewas a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his
might; but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from hisshaken hand. The blade was notched.
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 423
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath
blaze up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing
beside Boromir, he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at thehideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot jerked back,nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo’s arm. Black dropsdripped from the blade and smoked on the ﬂoor. Boromirhurled himself against the door and slammed it again.
‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is
deep! You have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after
crash. Rams and hammers were beating against it. It cracked
and staggered back, and the opening grew suddenly wide.Arrows came whistling in, but struck the northern wall, andfell harmlessly to the ﬂoor. There was a horn-blast and a rush
of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The
affray was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the ﬁercenessof the defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimlihewed the legs from under another that had sprung up onBalin’s tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thir-teen had fallen the rest ﬂed shrieking, leaving the defendersunharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch along the scalp.A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his orc: asturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A ﬁre was smoulderingin his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman stepbackwards, if he had seen it.
‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the
troll returns!’
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry
had reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almostman-high, clad in black mail from head to foot, leaped intothe chamber; behind him his followers clustered in the door-way. His broad ﬂat face was swart, his eyes were like coals,and his tongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With athrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s sword andbore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Divingunder Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he
424 the fellowship of the ring
charged into the Company and thrust with his spear straight
at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo
was hurled against the wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry,hacked at the spear-shaft, and it broke. But even as the orcﬂung down the truncheon and swept out his scimitar, Andu ´ril
came down upon his helm. There was a ﬂash like ﬂame andthe helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven head. His
followers ﬂed howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang atthem.
Doom ,doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice
rolled out again.
‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run
for it!’
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and
made for the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him.
The others followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away byLegolas: in spite of the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb withhis head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to, grindingupon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, butcould not be fastened.
‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought
you were dead!’ he cried.
‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder.
Off you go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutesfor me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Goquickly and choose paths leading right and downwards.’
‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn.‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf ﬁercely. ‘Swords are no more
use here. Go!’
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They
groped their way down a long ﬂight of steps, and then lookedback; but they could see nothing, except high above them thefaint glimmer of the wizard’s staff. He seemed to be stillstanding on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed heavily
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 425
and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They
stood peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought
he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering wordsthat ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He couldnot catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling.Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled:doom ,doom .
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white
light. Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The
drum-beats broke out wildly: doom-boom ,doom-boom , and
then stopped. Gandalf came ﬂying down the steps and fell tothe ground in the midst of the Company.
‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his
feet. ‘I have done all that I could. But I have met my match,
and have nearly been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Goon! You will have to do without light for a while: I am rathershaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come aheadwith me! Keep close behind, all of you!’
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened.
Doom ,doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded
mufﬂed and far away, but they were following. There was noother sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor any voice.Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage seemedto be going in the direction that he desired. Every now andagain it descended a ﬂight of steps, ﬁfty or more, to a lower
level. At the moment that was their chief danger; for in the
dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it andput their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the groundwith his staff like a blind man.
At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a
little more, and had descended many ﬂights of stairs. Therewas still no sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hopethat they would escape. At the bottom of the seventh ﬂightGandalf halted.
‘It is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least
to the level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look
426 the fellowship of the ring
for a left-hand turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am
very weary. I must rest here a moment, even if all the orcs
ever spawned are after us.’
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the
step. ‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked.‘Did you meet the beater of the drums?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself
suddenly faced by something that I have not met before. I
could think of nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spellon the door. I know many; but to do things of that kindrightly requires time, and even then the door can be brokenby strength.
‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side:
at any moment I thought they would burst it open. I could
not hear what was said; they seemed to be talking in theirown hideous language. All I caught was ghaˆsh: that is ‘‘ﬁre’’.
Then something came into the chamber – I felt it throughthe door, and the orcs themselves were afraid and fell silent.It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and myspell.
‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a
challenge. The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me.For an instant the door left my control and began to open! Ihad to speak a word of Command. That proved too great astrain. The door burst in pieces. Something dark as a cloudwas blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown back-wards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and the roof ofthe chamber as well, I think.
‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something
else is buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passagebehind us was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt sospent, but it is passing. And now what about you, Frodo?There was not time to say so, but I have never been moredelighted in my life than when you spoke. I feared that it wasa brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.’
‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I
think. I am bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 427
‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made
of a stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I
known, I would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! Thatspear-thrust would have skewered a wild boar!’
‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo;
‘though I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer andan anvil.’ He said no more. He found breathing painful.
‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about
you than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo
wondered if the remark meant more than it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He
had keen eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is alight ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’
‘Ghaˆsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they
meant: that the lower levels are on ﬁre? Still, we can only
go on.’
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by
all. It was ﬂickering and glowing on the walls away down thepassage before them. They could now see their way: in frontthe road sloped down swiftly, and some way ahead therestood a low archway; through it the growing light came. Theair became very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing
to them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening theysaw his face lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back.
‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our
welcome, no doubt. But I know now where we are: we havereached the First Deep, the level immediately below theGates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and the Gatesare near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not morethan a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair,along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out! But comeand look!’
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall.
It was loftier and far longer than the one in which they hadslept. They were near its eastern end; westward it ran away
428 the fellowship of the ring
into darkness. Down the centre stalked a double line of tower-
ing pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees whose
boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone.Their stems were smooth and black, but a red glow wasdarkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the ﬂoor, close tothe feet of two huge pillars a great ﬁssure had opened. Outof it a ﬁerce red light came, and now and again ﬂames licked
at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wispsof dark smoke wavered in the hot air.
‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper
halls, we should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Letus hope that the ﬁre now lies between us and pursuit. Come!There is no time to lose.’
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat:
Doom ,doom ,doom . Away beyond the shadows at the western
end of the hall there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom :
the pillars seemed to tremble and the ﬂames to quiver.
‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining
outside, we may still escape. After me!’
He turned left and sped across the smooth ﬂoor of the hall.
The distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they
heard the beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. Ashrill yell went up: they had been seen. There was a ring andclash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo’s head.
Boromir laughed. ‘They did not expect this,’ he said. ‘The
ﬁre has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’
‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is
dangerous and narrow.’
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end
of the hall the ﬂoor vanished and fell to an unknown depth.The outer door could only be reached by a slender bridge ofstone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the chasm with onecurving spring of ﬁfty feet. It was an ancient defence of theDwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Halland the outer passages. They could only pass across it insingle ﬁle. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others cameup in a pack behind.
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 429
‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next.
Straight on, and up the stair beyond the door!’
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang
back. Another pierced Gandalf’s hat and stuck there like a
black feather. Frodo looked behind. Beyond the ﬁre he sawswarming black ﬁgures: there seemed to be hundreds of orcs.They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as
blood in the ﬁrelight. Doom ,doom rolled the drum-beats,
growing louder and louder, doom ,doom .
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it
was a long shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell,and the arrow slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismayand fear. Two great trolls appeared; they bore great slabs ofstone, and ﬂung them down to serve as gangways over the
ﬁre. But it was not the trolls that had ﬁlled the Elf with terror.The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away,as if they themselves were afraid. Something was coming upbehind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like agreat shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, ofman-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terrorseemed to be in it and to go before it.
It came to the edge of the ﬁre and the light faded as if a
cloud had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across theﬁssure. The ﬂames roared up to greet it, and wreathed aboutit; and a black smoke swirled in the air. Its streaming manekindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand was a bladelike a stabbing tongue of ﬁre; in its left it held a whip of manythongs.
‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and
letting his axe fall he covered his face.
‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He
faltered and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune!And I am already weary.’
The dark ﬁgure streaming with ﬁre raced towards them.
The orcs yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then
430 the fellowship of the ring
Boromir raised his horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang
and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under the
cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs quailed and the ﬁeryshadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a ﬂameblown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced again.
‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength.
‘Fly! This is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow
way. Fly!’ Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command,but still held their ground, side by side, behind Gandalf atthe far end of the bridge. The others halted just within thedoorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable to leave theirleader to face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the
middle of the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but
in his other hand Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. Hisenemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow about itreached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and thethongs whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. ButGandalf stood ﬁrm.
‘You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead
silence fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of theﬂame of Anor. You cannot pass. The dark ﬁre will not availyou, ﬂame of Udu ˆn. Go back to the Shadow! You cannot
pass.’
The Balrog made no answer. The ﬁre in it seemed to die,
but the darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to thebridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, andits wings were spread from wall to wall; but still Gandalfcould be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed small,and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a wizened tree beforethe onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped ﬂaming.Glamdring glittered white in answer.There was a ringing clash and a stab of white ﬁre. The
Balrog fell back, and its sword ﬂew up in molten fragments.The wizard swayed on the bridge, stepped back a pace, andthen again stood still.
the bridge of khazad-du ˆm 431
‘You cannot pass!’ he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its
whip whirled and hissed.
‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran
back along the bridge. ‘ Elendil! ’ he shouted. ‘I am with you,
Gandalf!’
‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud
he smote the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder andfell from his hand. A blinding sheet of white ﬂame sprangup. The bridge cracked. Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke,and the stone upon which it stood crashed into the gulf, whilethe rest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rockthrust out into emptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow
plunged down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its
whip, and the thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’sknees, dragging him to the brink. He staggered and fell,grasped vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss. ‘Fly, youfools!’ he cried, and was gone.
The ﬁres went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company
stood rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragornand Boromir came ﬂying back, the rest of the bridge crackedand fell. With a cry Aragorn roused them.
‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his
last command. Follow me!’
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door,
Aragorn leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wideechoing passage. Along this they ﬂed. Frodo heard Sam athis side weeping, and then he found that he himself wasweeping as he ran. Doom ,doom ,doom the drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow; doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts
pierced the roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall,bright with daylight from its high windows in the east. Theyﬂed across it. Through its huge broken doors they passed,
432 the fellowship of the ring
and suddenly before them the Great Gates opened, an arch
of blazing light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind
the great door-posts towering on either side, but the gates
were shattered and cast down. Aragorn smote to the groundthe captain that stood in his path, and the rest ﬂed in terrorof his wrath. The Company swept past them and took no
heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang downthe huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and
felt the wind on their faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the
walls. Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the MistyMountains lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light
on the land. It was but one hour after noon. The sun wasshining; the clouds were white and high.
They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates
under the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earthrolled the slow drum-beats: doom . A thin black smoke trailed
out. Nothing else was to be seen; the dale all around wasempty. Doom . Grief at last wholly overcame them, and they
wept long: some standing and silent, some cast upon theground. Doom, doom . The drum-beats faded.
Chapter 6
LOTHLO ´RIEN
‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He
looked towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Fare-well, Gandalf!’ he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: if you pass the
doors of Moria, beware ? Alas that I spoke true! What hope
have we without you?’
He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’
he said. ‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves
and weep no more! Come! We have a long road, and much
to do.’
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran
up into a glen of shadows between two great arms of themountains, above which three white peaks were shining:Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. Atthe head of the glen a torrent ﬂowed like a white lace over
an endless ladder of short falls, and a mist of foam hung inthe air about the mountains’ feet.
‘Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the
falls. ‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside thetorrent we should have come, if fortune had been kinder.’
‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands
smiling in the sun!’ He shook his ﬁst at the furthest of thesnow-capped peaks and turned away.
To the east the outﬂung arm of the mountains marched to
a sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them,wide and vague. To the south the Misty Mountains recededendlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than a mile away,and a little below them, for they still stood high up on thewest side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval,
shaped like a great spear-head thrust deep into the northern
glen; but its southern end was beyond the shadows under the
434 the fellowship of the ring
sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue like clear
evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still and
unrufﬂed. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on allsides to its bare unbroken rim.
‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-za ˆram!’ said
Gimli sadly. ‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy ofthe sight! But we cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I
journey ere I have joy again. It is I that must hasten away,and he that must remain.’
The Company now went down the road from the Gates.
It was rough and broken, fading to a winding track betweenheather and whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. Butstill it could be seen that once long ago a great paved way had
wound upwards from the lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. Inplaces there were ruined works of stone beside the path, andmounds of green topped with slender birches, or ﬁr-treessighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them hard by thesward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadsidestood a single column broken at the top.
‘That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without
turning aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’
‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the
Gates. ‘The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, comeout till after dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall.The Moon is almost spent, and it will be dark tonight.’
‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from
the road. ‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zaˆram.’ He ran down the long green slope. Frodo followed
slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite of hurt andweariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It
was cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon itsside could not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot whereDurin ﬁrst looked in the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let uslook ourselves once, ere we go!’
They stooped over the dark water. At ﬁrst they could see
lothlo ´rien 435
nothing. Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling
mountains mirrored in a profound blue, and the peaks were
like plumes of white ﬂame above them; beyond there was aspace of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glintingstars, though sunlight was in the sky above. Of their ownstooping forms no shadow could be seen.
‘O Kheled-za ˆram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There
lies the Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed,
and turned away, and hastened back up the greensward tothe road again.
‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too
deep in thought to answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards,
running out from between the arms of the dale. Some way
below the mere they came on a deep well of water, clear ascrystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone lip and ranglistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel.
‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said
Gimli. ‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’
‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from
many other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our roadleads beside it for many miles. For I shall take you by theroad that Gandalf chose, and ﬁrst I hope to come to thewoods where the Silverlode ﬂows into the Great River – outyonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before them theycould see the stream leaping down to the trough of the valley,and then running on and away into the lower lands, until itwas lost in a golden haze.
‘There lie the woods of Lothlo ´rien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is
the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are notrees like the trees of that land. For in the autumn their leavesfall not, but turn to gold. Not till the spring comes and thenew green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are ladenwith yellow ﬂowers; and the ﬂoor of the wood is golden, andgolden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark ofthe trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood
436 the fellowship of the ring
say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of
that wood, and it were springtime!’
‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn.
‘But it lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with
the others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace,
and after a while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothingsince the early morning. Sam’s cut was burning like ﬁre, andhis head felt light. In spite of the shining sun the wind seemedchill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodofelt every step more painful and he gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind,
he spoke to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran
back, calling to Boromir to come with him.
‘I am sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has
happened this day and we have such need of haste, that Ihave forgotten that you were hurt; and Sam too. You shouldhave spoken. We have done nothing to ease you, as we ought,though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! Alittle further on there is a place where we can rest for a little.There I will do what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We willcarry them.’
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran
down from the west, and joined its bubbling water withthe hurrying Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fallof green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell. Aboutit stood ﬁr-trees, short and bent, and its sides were steepand clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle-berry.At the bottom there was a level space through which thestream ﬂowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested.It was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had comeonly a few miles from the Gates. Already the sun waswestering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a ﬁre of
brush- and ﬁr-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Samand Frodo. Sam’s wound was not deep, but it looked ugly,
lothlo ´rien 437
and Aragorn’s face was grave as he examined it. After a
moment he looked up with relief.
‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than
this in payment for the slaying of their ﬁrst orc. The cut is
not poisoned, as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. Itshould heal well when I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimlihas heated water.’
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves.
‘They are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said,
‘but here I have still some of the leaves of athelas that I
gathered near Weathertop. Crush one in the water, and washthe wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn,Frodo!’
‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments
touched. ‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what
the hammer and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel
that you are alive at all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’sold jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of wonder.Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before hiseyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took itoff and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars, andthe sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in apool.
‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin
to wrap an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbitshad such hides, all the hunters of Middle-earth would beriding to the Shire.’
‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would
be in vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is amithril-coat. Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of oneso fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of? Then heundervalued it. But it was well given!’
‘I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so
close in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! Ilove him more than ever. I hope we get a chance of tellinghim about it!’
438 the fellowship of the ring
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right
side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft
leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through itinto the ﬂesh. Frodo’s left side also was scored and bruisedwhere he had been hurled against the wall. While the othersset the food ready, Aragorn bathed the hurts with water inwhich athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance ﬁlled the
dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leavehim, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and soreto the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft padsof cloth at his side.
‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again,
if you can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have
such a coat. Do not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortunebrings you where you are safe for a while; and that will seldomchance while your quest lasts.’
When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on.
They put out the ﬁre and hid all traces of it. Then climbingout of the dell they took to the road again. They had not gonefar before the sun sank behind the westward heights and greatshadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk veiled theirfeet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east theevening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plainand wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly
refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one
brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three morehours.
It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear
stars, but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late.Gimli and Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and notspeaking, listening for any sound upon the road behind. Atlength Gimli broke the silence.
‘Not a sound but the wind,’ he said. ‘There are no goblins
near, or my ears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that theOrcs will be content with driving us from Moria. And maybe
lothlo ´rien 439
that was all their purpose, and they had nothing else to do
with us – with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captainto avenge.’
Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade
was dull. Yet he had heard something, or thought he had. Assoon as the shadows had fallen about them and the road
behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter of feet.Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were twotiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment he thought hesaw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished.
‘What is it?’ said the dwarf.‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet,
and I thought I saw a light – like eyes. I have thought so
often, since we ﬁrst entered Moria.’
Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing
but the night-speech of plant and stone,’ he said. ‘Come! Letus hurry! The others are out of sight.’
The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them.
Before them a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard anendless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze.
‘Lothlo ´rien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlo ´rien! We have come to
the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’
Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched
over the road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their
spreading boughs. In the dim light of the stars their stems
were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold.
‘Lothlo ´rien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the
wind in the trees! We are still little more than ﬁve leaguesfrom the Gates, but we can go no further. Here let us hopethat the virtue of the Elves will keep us tonight from the perilthat comes behind.’
‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’
said Gimli.
‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither
back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’
440 the fellowship of the ring
said Legolas, ‘but we hear that Lo ´rien is not yet deserted,
for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the
land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe theydwell now deep in the woods and far from the northernborder.’
‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and
sighed as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for
ourselves tonight. We will go forward a short way, until thetrees are all about us, and then we will turn aside from thepath and seek a place to rest in.’
He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did
not follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said.
‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn.‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’
said Boromir. ‘By strange paths has this Company been led,
and so far to evil fortune. Against my will we passed underthe shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we must enter theGolden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we haveheard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who oncego in; and of that few none have escaped unscathed.’
‘Say not unscathed , but if you say unchanged , then maybe
you will speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes inGondor, Boromir, if in the city of those who once were wisethey now speak evil of Lothlo ´rien. Believe what you will,
there is no other way for us – unless you would go back toMoria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim theGreat River all alone.’
‘Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’‘Perilous indeed,’ said Aragorn, ‘fair and perilous; but only
evil need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them.Follow me!’
They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when
they came upon another stream ﬂowing down swiftly fromthe tree-clad slopes that climbed back westward towards themountains. They heard it splashing over a fall away amongthe shadows on their right. Its dark hurrying waters ran across
lothlo ´rien 441
the path before them, and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of
dim pools among the roots of trees.
‘Here is Nimrodel!’ said Legolas. ‘Of this stream the Silvan
Elves made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in
the North, remembering the rainbow on its falls, and thegolden ﬂowers that ﬂoated in its foam. All is dark now andthe Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my feet,
for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.’ He wentforward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and steppedinto the stream.
‘Follow me!’ he cried. ‘The water is not deep. Let us wade
across! On the further bank we can rest, and the sound ofthe falling water may bring us sleep and forgetfulness ofgrief.’
One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For
a moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water ﬂow
over his tired feet. It was cold but its touch was clean, and ashe went on and it mounted to his knees, he felt that the stainof travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.
When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested
and ate a little food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlo ´rien
that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sun-light and starlight upon the meadows by the Great Riverbefore the world was grey.
At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the
waterfall running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodofancied that he could hear a voice singing, mingled withthe sound of the water.
‘Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?’ asked Legolas. ‘I will
sing you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the samename as the stream beside which she lived long ago. It is afair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs inthe Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.’ In asoft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leavesabove them he began:
442 the fellowship of the ring
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lo´rien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.
Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.
The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
lothlo ´rien 443
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlo ´rien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his ﬂowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.
But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. ‘I can-
not sing any more,’ he said. ‘That is but a part, for I have
forgotten much. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrowcame upon Lothlo ´rien, Lo ´rien of the Blossom, when the
Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’
‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli.‘I said not so; yet evil came,’ answered Legolas sadly. ‘Then
444 the fellowship of the ring
many of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings
and departed, and she was lost far in the South, in the passes
of the White Mountains; and she came not to the ship whereAmroth her lover waited for her. But in the spring when thewind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still beheard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind isin the South the voice of Amroth comes up from the sea; for
Nimrodel ﬂows into Silverlode, that Elves call Celebrant, andCelebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin ﬂows into theBay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lo ´rien set sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back.
‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a
tree that grew near the falls; for that was the custom of theElves of Lo ´rien, to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still.
Therefore they were called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people.
Deep in their forest the trees are very great. The people ofthe woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves, norbuild strong places of stone before the Shadow came.’
‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might
be thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. Helooked across the stream to the road that led back to DimrillDale, and then up into the roof of dark boughs above.
‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn.
‘We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as theGaladhrim and seek refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. Wehave sat here beside the road already longer than was wise.’
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went
into the shadow of the deeper woods, westward along themountain-stream away from Silverlode. Not far from the fallsof Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of whichoverhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mightygirth, but their height could not be guessed.
‘I will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees,
by root or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange tome, save as a name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are
those that bear the yellow blossom, but I have never climbed
lothlo ´rien 445
in one. I will see now what is their shape and way of growth.’
‘Whatever it may be,’ said Pippin, ‘they will be marvellous
trees indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds.
I cannot sleep on a perch!’
‘Then dig a hole in the ground,’ said Legolas, ‘if that is more
after the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep,if you wish to hide from Orcs.’ He sprang lightly up from the
ground and caught a branch that grew from the trunk highabove his head. But even as he swung there for a moment, avoice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him.
‘Daro! ’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped
back to earth in surprise and fear. He shrank against the boleof the tree.
‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or
speak!’
There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and
then another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo
could understand little of what was said, for the speech thatthe Silvan folk east of the mountains used among themselveswas unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and answeredin the same language. *
‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry.‘They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’‘Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you
breathe so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Samhastily put his hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also thatyou need have no fear. They have been aware of us for along while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, andknew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and thereforethey did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heardmy song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo; for theyseem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey.The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at thefoot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’
***
*See note in Appendix F: Of the Elves .
446 the fellowship of the ring
Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of
rope, silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it
looked slender it proved strong enough to bear many men.Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo followed slowly; behindcame Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches of themallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, andthen swept upward; but near the top the main stem divided
into a crown of many boughs, and among these they foundthat there had been built a wooden platform, or ﬂetas such
things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan .I t
was reached by a round hole in the centre through which theladder passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the ﬂet he found Legolas
seated with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-
grey, and could not be seen among the tree-stems, unlessthey moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of themuncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam.He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s. Then heshut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in hiselven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return.
‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Lan-
guage, speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but ourown; for we dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do notwillingly have dealings with any other folk. Even our ownkindred in the North are sundered from us. But there aresome of us still who go abroad for the gathering of news andthe watching of our enemies, and they speak the languagesof other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers,Ru´mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
‘But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the mess-
engers of Elrond passed by Lo ´rien on their way home up the
Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of – hobbits, of halﬂings, formany a long year, and did not know that any yet dwelt inMiddle-earth. You do not look evil! And since you come withan Elf of our kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as Elrondasked; though it is not our custom to lead strangers throughour land. But you must stay here tonight. How many are you?’
lothlo ´rien 447
‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men,
one of whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of
Westernesse.’
‘The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lo ´rien,’
said Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then iswell. But you have yet spoken only of seven.’
‘The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas.
‘A dwarf!’ said Haldir. ‘That is not well. We have not had
dealings with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They arenot permitted in our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’
‘But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Da ´in’s trusty
people, and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himselfchose him to be one of our companions, and he has beenbrave and faithful.’
The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned
Legolas in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last.
‘We will do this, though it is against our liking. If Aragornand Legolas will guard him, and answer for him, he shallpass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlo ´rien.
‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not
remain on the ground. We have been keeping watch on therivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going northtowards Moria, along the skirts of the mountains, many daysago. Wolves are howling on the wood’s borders. If you haveindeed come from Moria, the peril cannot be far behind.Tomorrow early you must go on.
‘The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us –
we do not fear them! There is another talan in the next
tree. There the others must take refuge. You, Legolas, mustanswer to us for them. Call us, if anything is amiss! And havean eye on that dwarf!’
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s
message; and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clamberedup on to the high ﬂet. They were out of breath and seemedrather scared.
‘There!’ said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your
448 the fellowship of the ring
blankets as well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of
our baggage in a deep drift of leaves.’
‘You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold
in the tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the
South; but we have food and drink to give you that will driveaway the night-chill, and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’
The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper
very gladly. Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only
in the fur-cloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets aswell, and tried to go to sleep. But weary as they were onlySam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like heights, anddo not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. Theﬂet was not at all to their liking as a bedroom. It had no walls,not even a rail; only on one side was there a light plaited
screen, which could be moved and ﬁxed in different placesaccording to the wind.
Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to
sleep in this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said.
‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping,
whether I roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I’ll dropoff, if you take my meaning.’
Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars
glinting through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam wassnoring at his side long before he himself closed his eyes. Hecould dimly see the grey forms of two elves sitting motionless
with their arms about their knees, speaking in whispers. The
other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lowerbranches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, andthe sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fellasleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind.
Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep.
The Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimlyamong the leaves. The wind was still. A little way off he hearda harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on the groundbelow. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowlyaway, and seemed to go southward, on into the wood.
lothlo ´rien 449
A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the ﬂet.
Frodo sat up in alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf.
He looked towards the hobbits.
‘What is it?’ said Frodo.‘Yrch! ’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the
ﬂet the rope-ladder rolled up.
‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had
gone.
There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent,
and the very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shiv-
ered in his wraps. He was thankful that they had not beencaught on the ground; but he felt that the trees offered littleprotection, except concealment. Orcs were as keen as houndson a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew
out Sting: it ﬂashed and glittered like a blue ﬂame; and thenslowly faded again and grew dull. In spite of the fading of hissword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave Frodo,rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to the openingand peered down. He was almost certain that he could hearstealthy movements at the tree’s foot far below.
Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless
in their movements. Then he heard faintly a sound likesnifﬁng; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the barkof the tree-trunk. He stared down into the dark, holding hisbreath.
Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came
like a soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up,close to the stem, Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stoppedand gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they turned away,and a shadowy ﬁgure slipped round the trunk of the tree andvanished.
Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up
through the branches. ‘There was something in this tree thatI have never seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It ﬂedas soon as I touched the tree-stem. It seemed to be wary, andto have some skill in trees, or I might have thought that itwas one of you hobbits.
450 the fellowship of the ring
‘I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot
risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They
crossed the Nimrodel – curse their foul feet in its clean water!– and went on down the old road beside the river. Theyseemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the groundfor a while near the place where you halted. The three of uscould not challenge a hundred, so we went ahead and spoke
with feigned voices, leading them on into the wood.
‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to
warn our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out ofLo´rien. And there will be many Elves hidden on the northern
border before another night falls. But you must take the roadsouth as soon as it is fully light.’
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it ﬁltered
through the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to
the hobbits that the early sun of a cool summer’s morning wasshining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the moving branches.Looking through an opening on the south side of the ﬂetFrodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea offallow gold tossing gently in the breeze.
The morning was still young and cold when the Company
set out again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Ru ´mil.
‘Farewell, sweet Nimrodel!’ cried Legolas. Frodo looked backand caught a gleam of white foam among the grey tree-stems.‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed to him that he would neverhear again a running water so beautiful, for ever blending itsinnumerable notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that still went on along the
west side of the Silverlode, and for some way they followedit southward. There were the prints of orc-feet in the earth.But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees and halted on thebank of the river under their shadows.
‘There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he
said, ‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like thelow whistle of a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees anElf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood thrown back; his
lothlo ´rien 451
hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully cast
over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and
bound the end about a tree near the bank.
‘Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,’ said
Haldir, ‘and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. Wedo not set foot in it so far north, unless we must. But in thesedays of watchfulness we do not make bridges. This is how
we cross! Follow me!’ He made his end of the rope fast aboutanother tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river andback again, as if he were on a road.
‘I can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have
not this skill. Must they swim?’
‘No!’ said Haldir. ‘We have two more ropes. We will fasten
them above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-
high, and holding these the strangers should be able to crosswith care.’
When this slender bridge had been made, the Company
passed over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily.Of the hobbits Pippin proved the best for he was sure-footed,and he walked over quickly, holding only with one hand; buthe kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down.Sam shufﬂed along, clutching hard, and looking down intothe pale eddying water as if it was a chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. ‘Live
and learn! as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinkingof gardening, not of roosting like a bird, nor of trying to walklike a spider. Not even my uncle Andy ever did a trick likethat!’
When at length all the Company was gathered on the east
bank of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiledtwo of them. Ru ´mil, who had remained on the other side,
drew back the last one, slung it on his shoulder, and with awave of his hand went away, back to Nimrodel to keep watch.
‘Now, friends,’ said Haldir, ‘you have entered the Naith of
Lo´rien, or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land
that lies like a spearhead between the arms of Silverlode andAnduin the Great. We allow no strangers to spy out the
452 the fellowship of the ring
secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are permitted even to set
foot there.
‘As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the
Dwarf. The others may walk free for a while, until we come
nearer to our dwellings, down in Egladil, in the Angle betweenthe waters.’
This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. ‘The agreement was
made without my consent,’ he said. ‘I will not walk blindfold,
like a beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have neverhad dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neitherhave we done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betrayyou than Legolas, or any other of my companions.’
‘I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. ‘Yet this is our law. I am
not the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done
much in letting you set foot over Celebrant.’
Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet ﬁrmly apart, and
laid his hand upon the haft of his axe. ‘I will go forward free,’he said, ‘or I will go back and seek my own land, where Iam known to be true of word, though I perish alone in thewilderness.’
‘You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have
come thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and theLady. They shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave,as they will. You cannot cross the rivers again, and behindyou there are now secret sentinels that you cannot pass. Youwould be slain before you saw them.’
Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion
bent their bows. ‘A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks!’said Legolas.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company,
you must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thussingled out. We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That willbe best, though it will make the journey slow and dull.’
Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall
look! Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blindbeggars with one dog? But I will be content, if only Legolashere shares my blindness.’
lothlo ´rien 453
‘I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming
angry in his turn.
‘Now let us cry: ‘‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’ ’
said Aragorn. ‘But the Company shall all fare alike. Come,
bind our eyes, Haldir!’
‘I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if
you do not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth
about his eyes.
‘You will have no claim,’ said Haldir. ‘I shall lead you well,
and the paths are smooth and straight.’
‘Alas for the folly of these days!’ said Legolas. ‘Here all are
enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, whilethe sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold!’
‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the
power of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the
estrangement that divides all those who still oppose him. Yetso little faith and trust do we ﬁnd now in the world beyondLothlo ´rien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by
our own trust endanger our land. We live now upon an islandamid many perils, and our hands are more often upon thebowstring than upon the harp.
‘The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no
more; for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Somespeak of departing, yet for that it already seems too late. Themountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the landsare waste, and full of Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumouredthat we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan,and the mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy.Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea, we shouldﬁnd no longer any shelter there. It is said that there are stillhavens of the High Elves, but they are far north and west,beyond the land of the Halﬂings. But where that may be,though the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’
‘You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said
Merry. ‘There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire,where Hobbits live.’
‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the
454 the fellowship of the ring
sea!’ said Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have
looked on it, yet still we remember it in song. Tell me of these
havens as we walk.’
‘I cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have
never been out of my own land before. And if I had knownwhat the world outside was like, I don’t think I should havehad the heart to leave it.’
‘Not even to see fair Lothlo ´rien?’ said Haldir. ‘The world
is indeed full of peril, and in it there are many dark places;
but still there is much that is fair, and though in all lands loveis now mingled with grief, it grows perhaps the greater.
‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will
draw back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believethat the world about us will ever again be as it was of old, or
the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear,it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass to theSea unhindered and leave the Middle-earth for ever. Alas forLothlo ´rien that I love! It would be a poor life in a land where
no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorn-trees beyond theGreat Sea, none have reported it.’
As they spoke thus, the Company ﬁled slowly along the
paths in the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walkedbehind. They felt the ground beneath their feet smooth andsoft, and after a while they walked more freely, without fearof hurt or fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo found hishearing and other senses sharpened. He could smell the treesand the trodden grass. He could hear many different notesin the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuringaway on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high inthe sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when theypassed through an open glade.
As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a
strange feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as hewalked on into the Naith: it seemed to him that he hadstepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the ElderDays, and was now walking in a world that was no more. InRivendell there was memory of ancient things; in Lo ´rien the
lothlo ´rien 455
ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil had
been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; the Elves
feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howlingon the wood’s borders: but on the land of Lo ´rien no shadow
lay.
All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the
cool evening come and heard the early night-wind whispering
among many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fearupon the ground; for their guides would not permit them tounbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morningthey went on again, walking without haste. At noon theyhalted, and Frodo was aware that they had passed out under
the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard the sound of many voicesall around him.
A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were
hastening towards the northern borders to guard against anyattack from Moria; and they brought news, some of whichHaldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid andalmost all destroyed; the remnant had ﬂed westward towardsthe mountains, and were being pursued. A strange creaturealso had been seen, running with bent back and with handsnear the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. Ithad eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowingwhether it was good or ill, and it had vanished down theSilverlode southward.
‘Also,’ said Haldir, ‘they bring me a message from the Lord
and Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, eventhe dwarf Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and whatis each member of your Company. New messages have comefrom Rivendell perhaps.’
He removed the bandage ﬁrst from Gimli’s eyes. ‘Your
pardon!’ he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendlyeyes! Look and be glad, for you are the ﬁrst dwarf to beholdthe trees of the Naith of Lo ´rien since Durin’s Day!’
When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up
and caught his breath. They were standing in an open space.
456 the fellowship of the ring
To the left stood a great mound, covered with a sward of
grass as green as Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as
a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had barkof snowy white, and were leaﬂess but beautiful in theirshapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of greatheight, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches ofa towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed
a white ﬂet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the greenhillsides the grass was studded with small golden ﬂowersshaped like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks,were other ﬂowers, white and palest green: they glimmeredas a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over all the sky wasblue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill and castlong green shadows beneath the trees.
‘Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,’ said Haldir. ‘For
this is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and
here is the mound of Amroth, where in happier days his highhouse was built. Here ever bloom the winter ﬂowers in theunfading grass: the yellow elanor , and the pale niphredil . Here
we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrimat dusk.’
The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass,
but Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to himthat he had stepped through a high window that looked on avanished world. A light was upon it for which his language
had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the shapes
seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been ﬁrst conceivedand drawn at the uncovering of his eyes, and ancient as ifthey had endured for ever. He saw no colour but those heknew, gold and white and blue and green, but they were freshand poignant, as if he had at that moment ﬁrst perceivedthem and made for them names new and wonderful. In winterhere no heart could mourn for summer or for spring. Noblemish or sickness or deformity could be seen in anythingthat grew upon the earth. On the land of Lo ´rien there was
no stain.
lothlo ´rien 457
He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him,
looking round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his
eyes as if he was not sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlightand bright day, right enough,’ he said. ‘I thought that Elveswere all for moon and stars: but this is more Elvish thananything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song, if
you take my meaning.’
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the
meaning of both thought and word. He smiled. ‘You feel the
power of the Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would itplease you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?’
They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad
slopes. Though he walked and breathed, and about him livingleaves and ﬂowers were stirred by the same cool wind as
fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in a timeless land thatdid not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When hehad gone and passed again into the outer world, still Frodothe wanderer from the Shire would walk there, upon the grassamong elanor andniphredil in fair Lothlo ´rien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the
South Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among thebranches. Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas uponbeaches that had long ago been washed away, and sea-birdscrying whose race had perished from the earth.
Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high ﬂet.
As Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon thetree beside the ladder: never before had he been so suddenlyand so keenly aware of the feel and texture of a tree’s skinand of the life within it. He felt a delight in wood and thetouch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was thedelight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir
took his hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look thisway ﬁrst!’ he said.
Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many
mighty trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he couldnot tell. Out of it, it seemed to him that the power and light
458 the fellowship of the ring
came that held all the land in sway. He longed suddenly to
ﬂy like a bird to rest in the green city. Then he looked east-
ward and saw all the land of Lo ´rien running down to the pale
gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted his eyes acrossthe river and all the light went out, and he was back again inthe world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared ﬂatand empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again
like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlo ´rien
had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.
‘There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said
Haldir. ‘It is clad in a forest of dark ﬁr, where the trees striveone against another and their branches rot and wither. In themidst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur, where longthe hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is
inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A black cloud liesoften over it of late. In this high place you may see the twopowers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strivenow in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heartof the darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Notyet.’ He turned and climbed swiftly down, and they followedhim.
At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and
silent as a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom ofelanor , and a light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some
fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him he knew that hebeheld things as they once had been in this same place. Forthe grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, andhe seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall and fair; andhe spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodocould not see. Arwen vanimelda, nama ´rie¨!he said, and then
he drew a breath, and returning out of his thought he lookedat Frodo and smiled.
‘Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,’ he said, ‘and here
my heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the darkroads that we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’And taking Frodo’s hand in his, he left the hill of CerinAmroth and came there never again as living man.
Chapter 7
THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows
were deepening in the woods, when they went on again.Their paths now went into thickets where the dusk had
already gathered. Night came beneath the trees as they
walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found
themselves under a pale evening sky pricked by a few earlystars. There was a wide treeless space before them, running
in a great circle and bending away on either hand. Beyond itwas a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon itsbrink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sunthat had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a greatheight a green wall encircling a green hill thronged withmallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in all the
land. Their height could not be guessed, but they stoodup in the twilight like living towers. In their many-tieredbranches and amid their ever-moving leaves countless lightswere gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir turnedtowards the Company.
‘Welcome to Caras Galadhon!’ he said. ‘Here is the city of
the Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadrielthe Lady of Lo ´rien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates
do not look northward. We must go round to the southernside, and the way is not short, for the city is great.’
There was a road paved with white stone running on the
outer brink of the fosse. Along this they went westward, withthe city ever climbing up like a green cloud upon their left;and as the night deepened more lights sprang forth, until allthe hill seemed aﬁre with stars. They came at last to a white
460 the fellowship of the ring
bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they
faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall
that here overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hungwith many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened sound-
lessly; but of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellerspassed within, and the gates shut behind them. They were in
a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and passing quicklythrough it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk couldthey see, nor hear any feet upon the paths; but there weremany voices, about them, and in the air above. Far away upon the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling fromon high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs,
until they came to the high places and saw before them amid
a wide lawn a fountain shimmering. It was lit by silver lampsthat swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell into a basinof silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the southside of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; itsgreat smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered,until its ﬁrst branches, far above, opened their huge limbsunder shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad whiteladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. Theysprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw thatthey were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shouldershung long white cloaks.
‘Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,’ said Haldir. ‘It is their
wish that you should ascend and speak with them.’
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small
horn, and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I willgo ﬁrst,’ said Haldir. ‘Let Frodo come next and with himLegolas. The others may follow as they wish. It is a longclimb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, butyou may rest upon the way.’
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many ﬂets: some
on one side, some on another, and some set about the bole
the mirror of galadriel 461
of the tree, so that the ladder passed through them. At a great
height above the ground he came to a wide talan , like the
deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that
almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon theearth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that he was in achamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the trunkof the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, and yet
making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was ﬁlled with a soft light; its walls were
green and silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seatedthere. On two chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopiedby a living bough there sat, side by side, Celeborn andGaladriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after themanner of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty
kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less tall than theLord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were cladwholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold,and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long andbright; but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were inthe depths of their eyes; for these were keen as lances in thestarlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him
in his own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word butlooked long upon his face.
‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Cele-
born. ‘When all have come we will speak together.’
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name
as they entered. ‘Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said.‘It is eight and thirty years of the world outside since youcame to this land; and those years lie heavy on you. But theend is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for awhile!’
‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred
journey hither from the North.’
‘Welcome Gimli son of Glo ´in! It is long indeed since we
saw one of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today wehave broken our long law. May it be a sign that though the
462 the fellowship of the ring
world is now dark better days are at hand, and that friendship
shall be renewed between our peoples.’ Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord
looked at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine
were to set out: so said the messages. But maybe there has
been some change of counsel that we have not heard. Elrondis far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this yearthe shadows have grown longer.’
‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady
Galadriel, speaking for the ﬁrst time. Her voice was clear andmusical, but deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Greyset out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders
of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired tospeak with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unlesshe comes within the fences of Lothlo ´rien: a grey mist is about
him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are hiddenfrom me.’
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow.
He remained in Moria and did not escape.’
At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief
and amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘themost evil that have been spoken here in long years full ofgrievous deeds.’ He turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing ofthis been told to me before?’ he asked in the elven-tongue.
‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our pur-
pose,’ said Legolas. ‘At ﬁrst we were weary and danger wastoo close behind; and afterwards we almost forgot our grieffor a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair paths ofLo´rien.’
‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said
Frodo. ‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria;and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, andhe fell.’
‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn.Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the
pass of Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he
the mirror of galadriel 463
spoke of Balin and his book, and the ﬁght in the Chamber
of Mazarbul, and the ﬁre, and the narrow bridge, and the
coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the Ancient World itseemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said Aragorn. ‘Itwas both a shadow and a ﬂame, strong and terrible.’
‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes
the most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’
‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our dark-
est dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice,
and dread was in his eyes.
‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under
Caradhras a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarveshad stirred up this evil in Moria again, I would have forbiddenyou to pass the northern borders, you and all that went with
you. And if it were possible, one would say that at the lastGandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into thenet of Moria.’
‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said
Galadriel gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds ofGandalf in life. Those that followed him knew not his mindand cannot report his full purpose. But however it may bewith the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repentof your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiledlong and far from Lothlo ´rien, who of the Galadhrim, even
Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish tolook upon their ancient home, though it had become an abodeof dragons?
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-za ˆram, and cold are the
springs of Kibil-na ˆla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of
Khazad-du ˆm in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings
beneath the stone.’ She looked upon Gimli, who sat gloweringand sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the namesgiven in his own ancient tongue, looked up and met her eyes;and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heartof an enemy and saw there love and understanding. Wondercame into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet
464 the fellowship of the ring
more fair is the living land of Lo ´rien, and the Lady Galadriel
is above all the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did
not know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli
forget my harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I
will do what I can to aid you, each according to his wish andneed, but especially that one of the little folk who bears theburden.’
‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at
Frodo. ‘But we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet notin vain will it prove, maybe, that you came to this land seekingaid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed. For the Lord of the
Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He hasdwelt in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dweltwith him years uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond orGondolin I passed over the mountains, and together throughages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
‘I it was who ﬁrst summoned the White Council. And if
my designs had not gone amiss, it would have been governedby Gandalf the Grey, and then mayhap things would havegone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I will notgive you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doingor contriving, nor in choosing between this course andanother, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is,and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: yourQuest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little andit will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all theCompany is true.’
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in
silence looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None saveLegolas and Aragorn could long endure her glance. Samquickly blushed and hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes,
and she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said.‘Tonight you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt
the mirror of galadriel 465
suddenly weary, as those who have been questioned long and
deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.
‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and
much toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you
should have refuge in this City, until you were healed andrefreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will not speak of yourfurther road for a while.’
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to
the satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a
pavilion among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laidsoft couches; then speaking words of peace with fair Elvishvoices they left them. For a little while the travellers talked oftheir night before in the tree-tops, and of their day’s journey,
and of the Lord and Lady; for they had not yet the heart tolook further back.
‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon
broke down. Anyone would have thought you had a guiltyconscience. I hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plotto steal one of my blankets.’
‘I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood
for jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothingon, and I didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside meand asking me what I would do if she gave me the chance ofﬂying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with – witha bit of garden of my own.’
‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt
myself; only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ heended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that
he was offered a choice between a shadow full of fear thatlay ahead, and something that he greatly desired: clear beforehis mind it lay, and to get it he had only to turn aside fromthe road and leave the Quest and the war against Sauron toothers.
‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice
would remain secret and known only to myself.’
466 the fellowship of the ring
‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir.
‘Maybe it was only a test, and she thought to read our
thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I shouldhave said that she was tempting us, and offering what shepretended to have the power to give. It need not be said thatI refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to theirword.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered him
Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir
pressed him with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze,Ring-bearer,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then
I will keep there.’
‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of
this Elvish Lady and her purposes.’
‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly.
‘You know not what you say. There is in her and in this land
no evil, unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let himbeware! But tonight I shall sleep without fear for the ﬁrst timesince I left Rivendell. And may I sleep deep, and forget for awhile my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.’ He casthimself down upon his couch and fell at once into a longsleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream
disturbed their slumber. When they woke they found that thelight of day was broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, andthe fountain rose and fell glittering in the sun.
They remained some days in Lothlo ´rien, so far as they
could tell or remember. All the while that they dwelt therethe sun shone clear, save for a gentle rain that fell at times,and passed away leaving all things fresh and clean. The airwas cool and soft, as if it were early spring, yet they felt aboutthem the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter. It seemed tothem that they did little but eat and drink and rest, and walkamong the trees; and it was enough.
They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had
the mirror of galadriel 467
little speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or
would use the Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them fare-
well and gone back again to the fences of the North, wheregreat watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria that theCompany had brought. Legolas was away much among theGaladhrim, and after the ﬁrst night he did not sleep withthe other companions, though he returned to eat and talk
with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he wentabroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke
of Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of himcame clear before their minds. As they were healed of hurtand weariness of body the grief of their loss grew more keen.Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that
they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for theycaught his name among the sweet sad words that they couldnot understand.
Mithrandir ,Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For
so they loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Com-pany, he would not interpret the songs for them, saying thathe had not the skill, and that for him the grief was still toonear, a matter for tears and not yet for song.
It was Frodo who ﬁrst put something of his sorrow into
halting words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme;even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself,though his memory was stored with many things that othershad made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountainin Lo´rien and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his
thought took shape in a song that seemed fair to him; yetwhen he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained,faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was greyhis footsteps on the Hill were heard;before the dawn he went awayon journey long without a word.
468 the fellowship of the ring
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden doorand darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,with bird on bough and beast in den,in their own secret tongues he spoke.
A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;an old man in a battered hatwho leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both deﬁed;his staff was broken on the stone,in Khazad-du ˆm his wisdom died.
‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam.
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I
can do yet.’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll
say a word about his ﬁreworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like
this:
The ﬁnest rockets ever seen:they burst in stars of blue and green,or after thunder golden showerscame falling like a rain of ﬂowers.
the mirror of galadriel 469
Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’
‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo.
But – well, I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think
of bringing the news to him.’
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in
the cool twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo
suddenly the shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehowthat the time was very near when he must leave Lothlo ´rien.
‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked
you the same question once before – it seems a very longwhile ago; but you have seen more of them since then.’
‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and
Elves. They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same.
Now these folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bitnearer to the likes of us: they seem to belong here, more eventhan Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they’ve made the land,or the land’s made them, it’s hard to say, if you take mymeaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here. Nothing seems to begoing on, and nobody seems to want it to. If there’s anymagic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my handson it, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo.‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No
ﬁreworks like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder wedon’t see nothing of the Lord and Lady in all these days.I fancy now that shecould do some wonderful things, if
she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr.Frodo!’
‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss
Gandalf’s ﬁreworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quicktemper, and his voice.’
‘You’re right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m ﬁnding fault.
I’ve often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of inold tales, but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’slike being at home and on a holiday at the same time, if youunderstand me. I don’t want to leave. All the same, I’m
470 the fellowship of the ring
beginning to feel that if we’ve got to go on, then we’d best
get it over.
‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to ﬁnish ,a s
my old gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk
can do much more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leavethis land that we shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’
‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I
hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady
of the Elves again.’
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to
their words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and whiteand fair she walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word,but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes
of the hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high
green hedge they came into an enclosed garden. No treesgrew there, and it lay open to the sky. The evening star hadrisen and was shining with white ﬁre above the westernwoods. Down a long ﬂight of steps the Lady went into thedeep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the silverstream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At thebottom, upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree,stood a basin of silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stooda silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel ﬁlled the basin to
the brim, and breathed on it, and when the water was stillagain she spoke. ‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said.‘I have brought you here so that you may look in it, if youwill.’
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-
lady beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for,and what shall we see?’ asked Frodo, ﬁlled with awe.
‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she
answered, ‘and to some I can show what they desire to see.But the Mirror will also show things unbidden, and those areoften stranger and more proﬁtable than things which we wishto behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror free to
the mirror of galadriel 471
work, I cannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things
that are, and things that yet may be. But which it is that he
sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to look?’
Frodo did not answer.‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your
folk would call magic, I believe; though I do not understandclearly what they mean; and they seem to use the same word
of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, if you will, is themagic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to seeElf-magic?’
‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curi-
osity. ‘I’ll have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing.
‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’
he said in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time
that I’ve been away. But there, like as not I’ll only see thestars, or something that I won’t understand.’
‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. ‘But come,
you shall look and see what you may. Do not touch thewater!’
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned
over the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars werereﬂected in it.
‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a
low gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had beenwithdrawn, the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There wassun shining, and the branches of trees were waving and toss-ing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mindwhat it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thoughthe saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a greatdark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along a dimpassage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came tohim suddenly that he was looking urgently for something,but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the visionshifted and went back, and he saw the trees again. But thistime they were not so close, and he could see what was goingon: they were not waving in the wind, they were falling,crashing to the ground.
472 the fellowship of the ring
‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted
Sandyman a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t
ought to be felled: it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shadesthe road to Bywater. I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fellhim!’
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and
a large red-brick building was being put up where it had
stood. Lots of folk were busily at work. There was a tall redchimney nearby. Black smoke seemed to cloud the surface ofthe Mirror.
‘There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond
knew what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merryback.’ Then suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘Ican’t stay here,’ he said wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve
dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s the poor old Gaffer goingdown the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must gohome!’
‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not
wish to go home without your master before you looked inthe Mirror, and yet you knew that evil things might well behappening in the Shire. Remember that the Mirror showsmany things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some nevercome to be, unless those that behold the visions turn asidefrom their path to prevent them. The Mirror is dangerous asa guide of deeds.’
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I
wish I had never come here, and I don’t want to see no moremagic,’ he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke againthickly, as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by thelong road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hopeI do get back some day. If what I’ve seen turns out true,somebody’s going to catch it hot!’
‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel.
‘You did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’
‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo.‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other.
the mirror of galadriel 473
I am not a counsellor. You may learn something, and whether
what you see be fair or evil, that may be proﬁtable, and yet
it may not. Seeing is both good and perilous. Yet I think,Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for theventure, or I would not have brought you here. Do as youwill!’
‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal
and bent over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and
he saw a twilit land. Mountains loomed dark in the distanceagainst a pale sky. A long grey road wound back out of sight.Far away a ﬁgure came slowly down the road, faint andsmall at ﬁrst, but growing larger and clearer as it approached.Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf.He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw
that the ﬁgure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a whitethat shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was awhite staff. The head was so bowed that he could see no face,and presently the ﬁgure turned aside round a bend in theroad and went out of the Mirror’s view. Doubt came intoFrodo’s mind: was this a vision of Gandalf on one of hismany lonely journeys long ago, or was it Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he
caught a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room.The table was littered with disordered papers; rain was beat-ing on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes
followed that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a greathistory in which he had become involved. The mist clearedand he saw a sight which he had never seen before but knewat once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in agreat storm. Then he saw against the Sun, sinking blood-redinto a wrack of clouds, the black outline of a tall ship withtorn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide river ﬂowingthrough a populous city. Then a white fortress with seventowers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it wasmorning again, and the water rippled with light, and a bannerbearing the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke
474 the fellowship of the ring
as of ﬁre and battle arose, and again the sun went down in a
burning red that faded into a grey mist; and into the mist a
small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It vanished,and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as
if a hole had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo lookedinto emptiness. In the black abyss there appeared a single
Eye that slowly grew, until it ﬁlled nearly all the Mirror. Soterrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry out orto withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with ﬁre, but wasitself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful and intent, and theblack slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that;
and Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the
many things that it sought he himself was one. But he alsoknew that it could not see him – not yet, not unless he willedit. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grewheavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was draggeddownwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing hot and curlsof steam were rising from the water. He was slipping forward.
‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly.
The vision faded, and Frodo found that he was looking atthe cool stars twinkling in the silver basin. He stepped backshaking all over and looked at the Lady.
‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is
also in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that onlyby singing amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrowsof elven-bows, is this land of Lothlo ´rien maintained and
defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo, that evenas I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know hismind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And hegropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door isclosed!’
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands
towards the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Ea ¨rendil,
the Evening Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clearabove. So bright was it that the ﬁgure of the Elven-lady cast
the mirror of galadriel 475
a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring
about her ﬁnger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with
silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed atthe ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that heunderstood.
‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to
speak of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be
hidden from the Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye.Verily it is in the land of Lo ´rien upon the ﬁnger of Galadriel
that one of the Three remains. This is Nenya, the Ring ofAdamant, and I am its keeper.
‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not
see now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of
Doom? For if you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy.Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished, andLothlo ´rien will fade, and the tides of Time will sweep it away.
We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk ofdell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’
Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at
last.
‘That what should be shall be,’ she answered. ‘The love of
the Elves for their land and their works is deeper than thedeeps of the Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot everwholly be assuaged. Yet they will cast all away rather thansubmit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the fate ofLothlo ´rien you are not answerable, but only for the doing of
your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of any avail, that theOne Ring had never been wrought, or had remained for everlost.’
‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said
Frodo. ‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It istoo great a matter for me.’
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the
Lady Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met hermatch in courtesy. Gently are you revenged for my testingof your heart at our ﬁrst meeting. You begin to see with a
476 the fellowship of the ring
keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to
ask what you offer. For many long years I had pondered what
I might do, should the Great Ring come into my hands, andbehold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that wasdevised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauronhimself stands or falls. Would not that have been a nobledeed to set to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force
or fear from my guest?
‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely!
In place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And Ishall not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morningand the Night! Fair as the Sea and the Sun and the Snowupon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the Light-ning! Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall
love me and despair!’
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore
there issued a great light that illumined her alone and left allelse dark. She stood before Frodo seeming now tall beyondmeasurement, and beautiful beyond enduring, terrible andworshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light faded,and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was shrunken: aslender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voicewas soft and sad.
‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the
West, and remain Galadriel.’
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady
spoke again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning youmust depart, for now we have chosen, and the tides of fateare ﬂowing.’
‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing
which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am per-mitted to wear the One Ring: why cannot Isee all the others
and know the thoughts of those that wear them?’
‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set
the Ring upon your ﬁnger since you knew what you pos-sessed. Do not try! It would destroy you. Did not Gandalf
the mirror of galadriel 477
tell you that the rings give power according to the measure
of each possessor? Before you could use that power you
would need to become far stronger, and to train your will tothe domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and asone that has borne it on ﬁnger and seen that which is hidden,your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thoughtmore clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw
the Eye of him that holds the Seven and the Nine. And didyou not see and recognize the ring upon my ﬁnger? Did yousee my ring?’ she asked turning again to Sam.
‘No, Lady,’ he answered. ‘To tell you the truth, I wondered
what you were talking about. I saw a star through yourﬁngers. But if you’ll pardon my speaking out, I think mymaster was right. I wish you’d take his Ring. You’d put things
to rights. You’d stop them digging up the Gaffer and turninghim adrift. You’d make some folk pay for their dirty work.’
‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it
would not stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it.Let us go!’
Chapter 8
FAREWELL TO LO ´RIEN
That night the Company was again summoned to the
chamber of Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greetedthem with fair words. At length Celeborn spoke of their
departure.
‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to con-
tinue the Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land.
Those who no longer wish to go forward may remain here,for a while. But whether they stay or go, none can be sure of
peace. For we are come now to the edge of doom. Here thosewho wish may await the oncoming of the hour till either theways of the world lie open again, or we summon them to thelast need of Lo ´rien. Then they may return to their own lands,
or else go to the long home of those that fall in battle.’
There was a silence. ‘They all resolved to go forward,’ said
Galadriel looking in their eyes.
‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and
not back.’
‘That is true,’ said Celeborn, ‘but is all this Company going
with you to Minas Tirith?’
‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond
Lothlo ´rien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do.
Indeed I do not think that even he had any clear purpose.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land,
you can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you
know well, it cannot be crossed by travellers with baggagebetween Lo ´rien and Gondor, save by boat. And are not the
bridges of Osgiliath broken down and all the landings heldnow by the Enemy?
‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith
lies upon this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the
farewell to lo ´rien 479
Quest lies east of the River, upon the darker shore. Which
shore will you now take?’
‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and
the way to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not
the leader of the Company.’ The others said nothing, andAragorn looked doubtful and troubled.
‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn.
‘It is not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I
may. There are some among you who can handle boats:Legolas, whose folk know the swift Forest River; and Boromirof Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.’
‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on
boats as wild horses. My people live by the banks of theBrandywine.’
‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your
Company with boats. They must be small and light, for if
you go far by water, there are places where you will be forcedto carry them. You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir,and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the Riverthunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils.Boats may make your journey less toilsome for a while. Yetthey will not give you counsel: in the end you must leavethem and the River, and turn west – or east.’
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats
comforted him much, not least because there would now beno need to decide his course for some days. The others, too,looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemedbetter to ﬂoat down the broad tide of Anduin to meet themthan to plod forward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubt-ful: he at any rate still thought boats as bad as wild horses,or worse, and not all the dangers that he had survived madehim think better of them.
‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven
before noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my peopleto you in the morning to help you make ready for the journey.Now we will wish you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’
‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace!
480 the fellowship of the ring
Do not trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the
road tonight. Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are
already laid before your feet, though you do not see them.Good night!’
The Company now took their leave and returned to their
pavilion. Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last
night in Lothlo ´rien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel
they wished to take counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and
how it would be best to attempt the fulﬁlling of their purposewith the Ring; but they came to no decision. It was plain thatmost of them desired to go ﬁrst to Minas Tirith, and to escape
at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy. They wouldhave been willing to follow a leader over the River andinto the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, andAragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had
been to go with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliverGondor. For he believed that the message of the dreams wasa summons, and that the hour had come at last when the heirof Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for themastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laidon him; and he knew that he could not now forsake the Ring,if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir. And yet whathelp could he or any of the Company give to Frodo, save towalk blindly with him into the darkness?
‘I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my
duty,’ said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while,sitting with his eyes ﬁxed on Frodo, as if he was trying toread the Halﬂing’s thoughts. At length he spoke again, softly,as if he was debating with himself. ‘If you wish only to destroythe Ring,’ he said, ‘then there is little use in war and weapons;and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help. But if you wish todestroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly togo without force into his domain; and folly to throw away.’He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was
farewell to lo ´rien 481
speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives
away, I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a
strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. Atleast, that is how I see it.’
Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s
glance, and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir’s thoughtwas different from his ﬁnal words. It would be folly to throw
away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said something likethis at the Council, but then he had accepted the correctionof Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deepin his own thought and made no sign that he had heededBoromir’s words. And so their debate ended. Merry andPippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The nightwas growing old.
In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slen-
der goods, Elves that could speak their tongue came to them
and brought them many gifts of food and clothing for thejourney. The food was mostly in the form of very thin cakes,made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside,and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli took up one of thecakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye.
‘Cram ,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp
corner and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, andhe ate all the rest of the cake with relish.
‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. ‘You have
eaten enough already for a long day’s march.’
‘I thought it was only a kind of cram, such as the Dale-men
make for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf.
‘So it is,’ they answered. ‘But we call it lembas or waybread,
and it is more strengthening than any food made by Men,and it is more pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’
‘Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ‘Why, it is better than the honey-
cakes of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for theBeornings are the best bakers that I know of; but they arenone too willing to deal out their cakes to travellers in thesedays. You are kindly hosts!’
482 the fellowship of the ring
‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat
little at a time, and only at need. For these things are given
to serve you when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweetfor many many days, if they are unbroken and left in theirleaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will keep atraveller on his feet for a day of long labour, even if he beone of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’
The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Com-
pany the clothes they had brought. For each they had pro-
vided a hood and cloak, made according to his size, of thelight but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim wove. It washard to say of what colour they were: grey with the hue oftwilight under the trees they seemed to be; and yet if theywere moved, or set in another light, they were green as
shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow ﬁelds by night, dusk-silver as water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened aboutthe neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them
with wonder.
‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the
leader of the Elves. ‘They are fair garments, and the web isgood, for it was made in this land. They are Elvish robescertainly, if that is what you mean. Leaf and branch, waterand stone: they have the hue and beauty of all these thingsunder the twilight of Lo ´rien that we love; for we put the
thought of all that we love into all that we make. Yet they aregarments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade.But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, andwarm enough or cool enough at need. And you will ﬁnd thema great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes,whether you walk among the stones or the trees. You areindeed high in the favour of the Lady! For she herself andher maidens wove this stuff; and never before have we cladstrangers in the garb of our own people.’
After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the
lawn by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a
farewell to lo ´rien 483
fair place, and it had become like home to them, though they
could not count the days and nights that they had passed
there. As they stood for a moment looking at the white waterin the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over thegreen grass of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight.
‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the Elf,
‘and I am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale
is full of vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains aretroubled. There are noises in the deeps of the earth. If anyof you had thought of returning northwards to your homes,you would not have been able to pass that way. But come!Your path now goes south.’
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways
were empty; but in the trees above them many voices were
murmuring and singing. They themselves went silently. Atlast Haldir led them down the southward slopes of the hill,and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps, andto the white bridge; and so they passed out and left the cityof the Elves. Then they turned away from the paved roadand took a path that went off into a deep thicket of mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands ofsilver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and east-wards, towards the shores of the River.
They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand
when they came on a high green wall. Passing through anopening they came suddenly out of the trees. Before themlay a long lawn of shining grass, studded with golden elanor
that glinted in the sun. The lawn ran out into a narrow tonguebetween bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlodeﬂowed glittering; on the left and east the Great River rolledits broad waters, deep and dark. On the further shores thewoodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye couldsee, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn liftedits gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lo ´rien.
On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from
the meeting of the streams, there was a hythe of white stonesand white wood. By it were moored many boats and barges.
484 the fellowship of the ring
Some were brightly painted, and shone with silver and gold
and green, but most were either white or grey. Three small
grey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and inthese the Elves stowed their goods. And they added also coilsof rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked, but strong,silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks.
‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon
the greensward.
‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never
travel far without a rope! And one that is long and strong and
light. Such are these. They may be a help in many needs.’
‘You don’t need to tell me that!’ said Sam. ‘I came without
any, and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wonderingwhat these were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making:
it’s in the family as you might say.’
‘They are made of hithlain ,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no
time now to instruct you in the art of their making. Had weknown that this craft delighted you, we could have taughtyou much. But now alas! unless you should at some timereturn hither, you must be content with our gift. May it serveyou well!’
‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the
boats! But take care at ﬁrst!’
‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. ‘These boats are
light-built, and they are crafty and unlike the boats of otherfolk. They will not sink, lade them as you will; but they arewayward if mishandled. It would be wise if you accustomedyourselves to stepping in and out, here where there is alanding-place, before you set off downstream.’
The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo,
and Sam were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin inanother; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli, who hadnow become fast friends. In this last boat most of the goodsand packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steeredwith short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shapedblades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial up
farewell to lo ´rien 485
the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward
slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking
back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on thewater dazzled his eyes. As they passed beyond the green ﬁeldof the Tongue, the trees drew down to the river’s brink. Hereand there golden leaves tossed and ﬂoated on the ripplingstream. The air was very bright and still, and there was a
silence, except for the high distant song of larks.
They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing
proudly down the stream towards them, they saw a swan ofgreat size. The water rippled on either side of the white breastbeneath its curving neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold,and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its huge whitewings were half lifted. A music came down the river as it
drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was a ship,wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness of a bird.Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. Inthe midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stoodGaladriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden ﬂowers was inher hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sadand sweet was the sound of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there
grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching
years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-
tears.
OL o´rien! The Winter comes, the bare and leaﬂess Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River ﬂows away.OL o´rien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
486 the fellowship of the ring
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to
me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside.
The Lady ended her song and greeted them. ‘We have come
to bid our last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with
blessings from our land.’
‘Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you
have not yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to aparting feast, here between the ﬂowing waters that will bearyou far from Lo ´rien.’
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned
their boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil
upon the green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodoate and drank little, heeding only the beauty of the Lady andher voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible, nor ﬁlledwith hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by menof later days Elves still at times are seen: present and yetremote, a living vision of that which has already been left farbehind by the ﬂowing streams of Time.
After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass,
Celeborn spoke to them again of their journey, and lifting hishand he pointed south to the woods beyond the Tongue.
‘As you go down the water,’ he said, ‘you will ﬁnd that the
trees will fail, and you will come to a barren country. Therethe River ﬂows in stony vales amid high moors, until at lastafter many leagues it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock,that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its arms about thesteep shores of the isle, and falls then with a great noise andsmoke over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf,the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is a wideregion of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuousand much divided. There the Entwash ﬂows in by manymouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About thatstream, on this side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the
farewell to lo ´rien 487
further side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil. The wind
blows from the East there, for they look out over the Dead
Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and theblack gates of Mordor.
‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith,
will do well to leave the Great River above Rauros and crossthe Entwash before it ﬁnds the marshes. Yet they should not
go too far up that stream, nor risk becoming entangled in theForest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is now littleknown. But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need thiswarning.’
‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said
Boromir. ‘But what I have heard seems to me for the mostpart old wives’ tales, such as we tell to our children. All that
lies north of Rohan is now to us so far away that fancy canwander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders ofour realm; but it is now many lives of men since any of usvisited it, to prove or disprove the legends that have comedown from distant years.
‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never
crossed it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger,I passed through the Gap by the skirts of the White Moun-tains, and crossed the Isen and the Greyﬂood into Norther-land. A long and wearisome journey. Four hundred leaguesI reckoned it, and it took me many months; for I lost myhorse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyﬂood. After thatjourney, and the road I have trodden with this Company, Ido not much doubt that I shall ﬁnd a way through Rohan,and Fangorn too, if need be.’
‘Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not
despise the lore that has come down from distant years; foroft it may chance that old wives keep in memory word ofthings that once were needful for the wise to know.’
Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from
one of her maidens she ﬁlled it with white mead and gave itto Celeborn.
488 the fellowship of the ring
‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said.
‘Drink, Lord of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be
sad, though night must follow noon, and already our eveningdraweth nigh.’
Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and
bade them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk shecommanded them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were
set for her and for Celeborn. Her maidens stood silent abouther, and a while she looked upon her guests. At last she spokeagain.
‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the
shadows fall between us. But before you go, I have broughtin my ship gifts which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrimnow offer you in memory of Lothlo ´rien.’ Then she called to
each in turn.
‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of
your Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a
sheath that had been made to ﬁt his sword. It was overlaidwith a tracery of ﬂowers and leaves wrought of silver andgold, and on it were set in elven-runes formed of many gemsthe name Andu ´ril and the lineage of the sword.
‘The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be
stained or broken even in defeat,’ she said. ‘But is there aughtelse that you desire of me at our parting? For darkness willﬂow between us, and it may be that we shall not meet again,unless it be far hence upon a road that has no returning.’
And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire,
and long held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet itis not yours to give me, even if you would; and only throughdarkness shall I come to it.’
‘Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,’ said Galadriel; ‘for
it was left in my care to be given to you, should you passthrough this land.’ Then she lifted from her lap a great stoneof a clear green, set in a silver brooch that was wrought inthe likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; and as she heldit up the gem ﬂashed like the sun shining through the leavesof spring. ‘This stone I gave to Celebrı ´an my daughter, and
farewell to lo ´rien 489
she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In
this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar,
the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’
Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon
his breast, and those who saw him wondered; for they hadnot marked before how tall and kingly he stood, and it seemedto them that many years of toil had fallen from his shoulders.
‘For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,’ he said,‘O Lady of Lo ´rien of whom were sprung Celebrı ´an and
Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boro-
mir, and to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry andPippin she gave small silver belts, each with a clasp wroughtlike a golden ﬂower. To Legolas she gave a bow such as
the Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows ofMirkwood, and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it wenta quiver of arrows.
‘For you little gardener and lover of trees,’ she said to Sam,
‘I have only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box ofplain grey wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune uponthe lid. ‘Here is set G for Galadriel,’ she said; ‘but also it maystand for garden in your tongue. In this box there is earthfrom my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has still tobestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nordefend you against any peril; but if you keep it and see yourhome again at last, then perhaps it may reward you. Thoughyou should ﬁnd all barren and laid waste, there will be fewgardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden,if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may rememberGaladriel, and catch a glimpse far off of Lo ´rien, that you
have seen only in our winter. For our Spring and our Summerare gone by, and they will never be seen on earth again savein memory.’
Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaud-
ible, as he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.
‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said
Galadriel, turning to Gimli.
490 the fellowship of the ring
‘None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. ‘It is enough for me to have
seen the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle
words.’
‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none
say again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yetsurely, Gimli son of Glo ´in, you desire something that I could
give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be the only guest
without a gift.’
‘There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,’ said Gimli, bowing low
and stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be – unless it ispermitted to ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair,which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass thegems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But youcommanded me to name my desire.’
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and
Celeborn gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled.
‘It is said that the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands ratherthan in their tongues,’ she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli.For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yet socourteous. And how shall I refuse, since I commanded himto speak? But tell me, what would you do with such a gift?’
‘Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your
words to me at our ﬁrst meeting. And if ever I return to thesmithies of my home, it shall be set in imperishable crystalto be an heirloom of my house, and a pledge of good willbetween the Mountain and the Wood until the end ofdays.’
Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut
off three golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. ‘Thesewords shall go with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, forall foretelling is now vain: on the one hand lies darkness, andon the other only hope. But if hope should not fail, then Isay to you, Gimli son of Glo ´in, that your hands shall ﬂow
with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion.
‘And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. ‘I come
to you last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I haveprepared this.’ She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered
farewell to lo ´rien 491
as she moved it, and rays of white light sprang from her hand.
‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is caught the light of Ea ¨rendil’s star,
set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still brighter
when night is about you. May it be a light to you in darkplaces, when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel andher Mirror!’
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between
them, he saw her again standing like a queen, great and
beautiful, but no longer terrible. He bowed, but found nowords to say.
Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the
hythe. A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue,and the water glittered with silver. All at last was made ready.
The Company took their places in the boats as before. Cryingfarewell, the Elves of Lo ´rien with long grey poles thrust them
out into the ﬂowing stream, and the rippling waters borethem slowly away. The travellers sat still without moving orspeaking. On the green bank near to the very point of theTongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As theypassed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowlyﬂoating away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lo ´rien
was slipping backward, like a bright ship masted withenchanted trees, sailing on to forgotten shores, while they sathelpless upon the margin of the grey and leaﬂess world.
Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the
currents of the Great River, and their boats turned and beganto speed southward. Soon the white form of the Lady wassmall and distant. She shone like a window of glass upon afar hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from amountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then itseemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a ﬁnal farewell,and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came thesound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancienttongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not under-stand the words: fair was the music, but it did not comforthim.
492 the fellowship of the ring
Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in
his memory, and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well
as he could: the language was that of Elven-song and spokeof things little known on Middle-earth.
Ai! laurie ¨lantar lassi su ´rinen,
ye´ni u´no´time¨ve ra´mar aldaron!
Ye´ni ve linte ¨yuldar ava ´nier
mi oromardi lisse-miruvo ´reva
Andu´ne¨pella, Vardo tellumar
nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni
o´maryo aireta ´ri-lı´rinen.
Sı´man i yulma nin enquantuva?
An sı´Tintalle ¨Varda Oiolosse ¨o
ve fanyar ma ´ryat Elenta ´ri ortane ¨,
ar ilye ¨tier undula ´ve¨lumbule ¨;
ar sindano ´riello caita mornie ¨
i falmalinnar imbe ¨met, ar hı ´sie¨
untu´pa Calaciryo mı ´ri oiale ¨.
Sı´vanwa na ´,R o´mello vanwa, Valimar!
Nama ´rie¨! Nai hiruvalye ¨Valimar.
Nai elye ¨
hiruva. Nama ´rie¨!
‘Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years number-
less as the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift
draughts of the sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West,beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein the stars tremblein the song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who now shall
reﬁll the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queenof the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her handslike clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow; andout of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming wavesbetween us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever.Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell!
farewell to lo ´rien 493
Maybe thou shalt ﬁnd Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt ﬁnd
it. Farewell!’ Varda is the name of that Lady whom the Elves
in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks
rose upon either side, and the light of Lo ´rien was hidden. To
that fair land Frodo never came again.
The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the
sun was before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were
ﬁlled with tears. Gimli wept openly.
‘I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,’ he said
to Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothingfair, unless it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast.
‘Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little
did I know where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke,
saying that we could not foresee what we might meet uponour road. Torment in the dark was the danger that I feared,and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, hadI known the danger of light and joy. Now I have taken myworst wound in this parting, even if I were to go this nightstraight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Glo ´in!’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk
the world in these after-days. For such is the way of it: toﬁnd and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on therunning stream. But I count you blessed, Gimli son of Glo ´in:
for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you mighthave chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken your com-panions, and the least reward that you shall have is that thememory of Lothlo ´rien shall remain ever clear and unstained
in your heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’
‘Maybe,’ said Gimli; ‘and I thank you for your words. True
words doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is notwhat the heart desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear asKheled-za ˆram. Or so says the heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves
may see things otherwise. Indeed I have heard that for themmemory is more like to the waking world than to a dream.Not so for Dwarves.
494 the fellowship of the ring
‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too
low in the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is
swift. I do not wish to drown my grief in cold water.’ He tookup a paddle, and steered towards the western bank, followingAragorn’s boat ahead, which had already moved out of themiddle stream.
So the Company went on their long way, down the wide
hurrying waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked
along either bank, and they could not see any glimpse of thelands behind. The breeze died away and the River ﬂowedwithout a sound. No voice of bird broke the silence. The sungrew misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale skylike a high white pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk
came early, followed by a grey and starless night. Far intothe dark quiet hours they ﬂoated on, guiding their boats underthe overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great treespassed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty rootsthrough the mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold.Frodo sat and listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the Riverfretting among the tree-roots and driftwood near the shore,until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy sleep.
Chapter 9
THE GREAT RIVER
Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well
wrapped, under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner ofthe woodlands on the west bank of the Great River, Anduin.
He had slept the night away, and the grey of morning was
dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a smallﬁre near at hand.
They started again before the day was broad. Not that
most of the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they
were content that the decision, which they must make at latestwhen they came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still laysome days ahead; and they let the River bear them on at itsown pace, having no desire to hasten towards the perils thatlay beyond, whichever course they took in the end. Aragornlet them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding
their strength against weariness to come. But he insisted thatat least they should start early each day and journey on farinto the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing,and he feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle whilethey lingered in Lo ´rien.
Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor
the next. The dull grey hours passed without event. As thethird day of their voyage wore on the lands changed slowly:the trees thinned and then failed altogether. On the easternbank to their left they saw long formless slopes stretching upand away towards the sky; brown and withered they looked,as if ﬁre had passed over them, leaving no living blade ofgreen: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree or abold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the
Brown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence
496 the fellowship of the ring
or war or evil deed of the Enemy had so blasted all that region
even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but
it was ﬂat, and in many places green with wide plains of
grass. On this side of the River they passed forests of greatreeds, so tall that they shut out all view to the west, as thelittle boats went rustling by along their ﬂuttering borders.
Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light coldairs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through open-ings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads,and far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on theedge of sight a dark line, where marched the southernmostranks of the Misty Mountains.
There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of
these there were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the
reeds, but they were seldom seen. Once or twice the travellersheard the rush and whine of swan-wings, and looking up theysaw a great phalanx streaming along the sky.
‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’‘How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!’
said Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed southit got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind forever.’
‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered
Aragorn. ‘It is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Herethe world is cold until the sudden spring, and we may yethave snow again. Far away down in the Bay of Belfalas, towhich Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or wouldbe but for the Enemy. But here we are not above sixty leagues,I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hun-dreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now south-westacross the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the land ofthe Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of theLimlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the GreatRiver. That is the north boundary of Rohan; and of old allthat lay between Limlight and the White Mountains belonged
the great river 497
to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and its grass
has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the
River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the orcscan shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late, it issaid, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herdsand studs of Rohan.’
Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had
seemed hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and
lurking dangers; now he wished that the trees were still there.He felt that the Company was too naked, aﬂoat in little openboats in the midst of shelterless lands, and on a river that wasthe frontier of war.
In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily
southwards, this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Com-
pany. For a whole day they took to their paddles and hastenedforward. The banks slid by. Soon the River broadened andgrew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, andthere were gravel-shoals in the water, so that careful steeringwas needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, overwhich ﬂowed a chill air from the East. On the other side themeads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst aland of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawnsand fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlo ´rien.
There was little speech and no laughter in any of the boats.Each member of the Company was busy with his ownthoughts.
The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a
summer night in some northern glade amid the beech-woods;Gimli was ﬁngering gold in his mind, and wondering if itwere ﬁt to be wrought into the housing of the Lady’s gift.Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, forBoromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails,as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimesseizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn’s.Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught aqueer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.Sam had long ago made up his mind that, though boats were
498 the fellowship of the ring
maybe not as dangerous as he had been brought up to believe,
they were far more uncomfortable than even he had imag-
ined. He was cramped and miserable, having nothing to dobut stare at the winter-lands crawling by and the grey wateron either side of him. Even when the paddles were in usethey did not trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking
back over the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the
following boats; he was drowsy and longed for camp and thefeel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught hissight: at ﬁrst he stared at it listlessly, then he sat up andrubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he could not seeit any more.
That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western
bank. Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. ‘I had a funny
dream an hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ hesaid. ‘Or maybe it wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’
‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would
not settle down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘Ihaven’t seen or thought of anything to make me smile sincewe left Lothlo ´rien.’
‘It wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All
wrong, if it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It waslike this: I saw a log with eyes!’
‘The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. ‘There are many in the
River. But leave out the eyes!’
‘That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘’Twas the eyes as made me sit
up, so to speak. I saw what I took to be a log ﬂoating alongin the half-light behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give muchheed to it. Then it seemed as if the log was slowly catchingus up. And that was peculiar, as you might say, seeing as wewere all ﬂoating on the stream together. Just then I saw theeyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at thenear end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it hadpaddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger,and kept dipping in and out of the water.
the great river 499
‘That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning
to give a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the
drowse out of my head. For the whatever-it-was was comingalong fast now and getting close behind Gimli. But whetherthose two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whetherI came to my senses, I don’t know. When I looked again, itwasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with the tail of
my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting underthe shadow of the bank. I couldn’t see no more eyes, though.
‘I said to myself: ‘‘dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,’’ I said;
and I said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since,and now I’m not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr.Frodo?’
‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and
sleep in your eyes, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘if this was the ﬁrst time
that those eyes had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them awayback north before we reached Lo ´rien. And I saw a strange
creature with eyes climbing to the ﬂet that night. Haldir sawit too. And do you remember the report of the Elves thatwent after the orc-band?’
‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t
like my thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, andMr. Bilbo’s stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on thecreature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’
‘Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,’ said Frodo.
‘Ever since the night on the ﬂet. I suppose he was lurking inMoria, and picked up our trail then; but I hoped that ourstay in Lo ´rien would throw him off the scent again. The
miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods bythe Silverlode, watching us start off!’
‘That’s about it,’ said Sam. ‘And we’d better be a bit more
watchful ourselves, or we’ll feel some nasty ﬁngers round ournecks one of these nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything.And that’s what I was leading up to. No need to troubleStrider or the others tonight. I’ll keep watch. I can sleeptomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as youmight say.’
500 the fellowship of the ring
‘I might,’ said Frodo, ‘and I might say ‘‘luggage with eyes’’.
You shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me half-way
towards morning, if nothing happens before then.’
In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to
ﬁnd Sam shaking him. ‘It’s a shame to wake you,’ whisperedSam, ‘but that’s what you said. There’s nothing to tell, or not
much. I thought I heard some soft plashing and a snifﬁngnoise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer soundsby a river at night.’
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,
and fought off his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, andnothing happened. Frodo was just yielding to the temptation
to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly visible, ﬂoatedclose to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand couldbe dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; twopale lamplike eyes shone coldly as they peered inside, andthen they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on the eyot. Theywere not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo heard thesoft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting fromits sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light wasshut off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the darklog-shape shot away downstream into the night. Aragornstirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up.
‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to
Frodo. ‘I felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawnyour sword?’
‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad,
do you? He padded after us all through Moria and right downto Nimrodel. Since we took to boats, he has been lying on alog and paddling with hands and feet. I have tried to catchhim once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, and asslippery as a ﬁsh. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him,but he is too clever a waterman.
‘We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down
now, and I will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish
the great river 501
I could lay my hands on the wretch. We might make him
useful. But if I cannot, we shall have to try and lose him. He
is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on hisown account, he may put any enemy that is about on ourtrack.’
The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a
shadow again. After that the Company kept a sharp look-out,
but they saw no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. Ifhe was still following, he was very wary and cunning. AtAragorn’s bidding they paddled now for long spells, and thebanks went swiftly by. But they saw little of the country, forthey journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting by day,
and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the timepassed without event until the seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the
East, but as evening drew into night the sky away westwardcleared, and pools of faint light, yellow and pale green,opened under the grey shores of cloud. There the white rindof the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remotelakes. Sam looked at it and puckered his brows.
The next day the country on either side began to change
rapidly. The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon theywere passing through a hilly rocky land, and on both shoresthere were steep slopes buried in deep brakes of thorn andsloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stoodlow crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of grey weathered stonedark with ivy; and beyond these again there rose high ridgescrowned with wind-writhen ﬁrs. They were drawing near tothe grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern marchof Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-
chimneys, and all day high in the air ﬂocks of birds had beencircling, black against the pale sky. As they lay in their campthat day Aragorn watched the ﬂights doubtfully, wonderingif Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news oftheir voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the
502 the fellowship of the ring
sun was setting, and the Company was stirring and getting
ready to start again, he descried a dark spot against the fading
light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now ﬂyingon slowly southwards.
‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern
sky. ‘Is it, as I think, an eagle?’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas. ‘It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder
what that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’
‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and
windless; the grey east wind had passed away. The thin cres-
cent of the Moon had fallen early into the pale sunset, butthe sky was clear above, and though far away in the South
there were great ranges of cloud that still shone faintly, in theWest stars glinted bright.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey
by night. We are coming to reaches of the River that I do notknow well; for I have never journeyed by water in these partsbefore, not between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. Butif I am right in my reckoning, those are still many milesahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we comethere: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must keep asharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’
To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watch-
man. He lay forward peering into the gloom. The night grewdark, but the stars above were strangely bright, and there wasa glimmer on the face of the River. It was close on midnight,and they had been drifting for some while, hardly using thepaddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yardsahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard theswirl of racing water. There was a swift current which swungleft, towards the eastern shore where the channel was clear.As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now veryclose, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocksthat were thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth.The boats were all huddled together.
the great river 503
‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat
bumped into the leader. ‘This is madness! We cannot dare
the Rapids by night! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, beit night or day.’
‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Turn! Turn if you can!’ He
drove his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat andbring it round.
‘I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not
know that we had come so far: Anduin ﬂows faster than I
thought. Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already.’
With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly
brought them about; but at ﬁrst they could make only smallheadway against the current, and all the time they were
carried nearer and nearer to the eastern bank. Now dark andominous it loomed up in the night.
‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we
shall be driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo feltthe keel beneath him grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several
arrows whistled over them, and some fell among them. Onesmote Frodo between the shoulders and he lurched forwardwith a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell back,foiled by his hidden coat of mail. Another passed throughAragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of thesecond boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought he couldglimpse black ﬁgures running to and fro upon the longshingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemedvery near.
‘Yrch! ’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli.‘Gollum’s doing, I’ll be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And
a nice place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking usright into their arms!’
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam
took a hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite ofblack-feathered arrows. Many whined overhead or struck the
504 the fellowship of the ring
water nearby; but there were no more hits. It was dark, but
not too dark for the night-eyes of Orcs, and in the star-
glimmer they must have offered their cunning foes somemark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lo ´rien and the
grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice ofthe archers of Mordor.
Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was
hard to be sure that they were indeed moving at all; but slowly
the swirl of the water grew less, and the shadow of the easternbank faded back into the night. At last, as far as they couldjudge, they had reached the middle of the stream again andhad driven their boats back some distance above the juttingrocks. Then half turning they thrust them with all theirstrength towards the western shore. Under the shadow of
bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drewbreath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he
had brought from Lo ´rien. Then he sprang ashore and
climbed a few paces up the bank. Stringing the bow andﬁtting an arrow he turned, peering back over the River intothe darkness. Across the water there were shrill cries, butnothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he
gazed into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His headwas dark, crowned with sharp white stars that glittered in theblack pools of the sky behind. But now rising and sailing upfrom the South the great clouds advanced, sending out darkoutriders into the starry ﬁelds. A sudden dread fell on theCompany.
‘Elbereth Gilthoniel! ’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even
as he did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud,for it moved far more swiftly, came out of the blackness inthe South, and sped towards the Company, blotting out alllight as it approached. Soon it appeared as a great wingedcreature, blacker than the pits in the night. Fierce voices roseup to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chillrunning through him and clutching at his heart; there was a
the great river 505
deadly cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his shoulder.
He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly the great bow of Lo ´rien sang. Shrill went the
arrow from the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above
him the winged shape swerved. There was a harsh croakingscream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down into the gloomof the eastern shore. The sky was clean again. There was a
tumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in thedarkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came againfrom the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They
felt their way along the water’s edge for some distance, untilthey found a small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there
close to the water, and behind them rose a steep rocky bank.Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn: itwas useless to attempt to move further by night. They madeno camp and lit no ﬁre, but lay huddled in the boats, mooredclose together.
‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of
Legolas!’ said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas . ‘That
was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!’
‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas.‘I cannot,’ said Gimli. ‘But I am glad that the shadow came
no nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me ofthe shadow in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog,’ he endedin a whisper.
‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the
chill that had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. Ithink it was——’ Then he paused and fell silent.
‘What do you think?’ asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from
his boat, as if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo’s face.
‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever
it was, its fall has dismayed our enemies.’
‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how
many, and what they will do next, we do not know. Thisnight we must all be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what
506 the fellowship of the ring
the day will show who can tell? Have your weapons close to
hand!’
Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting
on his ﬁngers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’
he murmured. ‘The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in
Wilderland, or it ought to be. But either it’s out of its running,or I’m all wrong in my reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr.Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the ﬂet up in thattree: a week from the full, I reckon. And we’d been a weekon the way last night, when up pops a New Moon as thin asa nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the Elvishcountry.
‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I
seem to remember several more, but I would take my oath it
was never a whole month. Anyone would think that time didnot count in there!’
‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that
land, maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long goneby. It was not, I think, until Silverlode bore us back to Anduinthat we returned to the time that ﬂows through mortal landsto the Great Sea. And I don’t remember any moon, eithernew or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sunby day.’
Legolas stirred in his boat. ‘Nay, time does not tarry ever,’
he said; ‘but change and growth is not in all things and placesalike. For the Elves the world moves, and it moves both veryswift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves changelittle, and all else ﬂeets by: it is a grief to them. Slow, becausethey need not count the running years, not for themselves.The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the longlong stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to anend at last.’
‘But the wearing is slow in Lo ´rien,’ said Frodo. ‘The power
of the Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short theyseem, in Caras Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.’
the great river 507
‘That should not have been said outside Lo ´rien, not even
to me,’ said Aragorn. ‘Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam:
in that land you lost your count. There time ﬂowed swiftlyby us, as for the Elves. The old moon passed, and a newmoon waxed and waned in the world outside, while we tarriedthere. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter isnearly gone. Time ﬂows on to a spring of little hope.’
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again
across the water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the
changing of the weather. The air grew warm and very stillunder the great moist clouds that had ﬂoated up from theSouth and the distant seas. The rushing of the River overthe rocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer.
The twigs of the trees above them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had
become soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light,diffused and shadowless. There was mist on the River, andwhite fog swathed the shore; the far bank could not be seen.
‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky
one. Now perhaps we can get away without those cursedgoblins seeing us.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to ﬁnd the
path unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must ﬁnd thepath, if we are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the EmynMuil.’
‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the
River any further,’ said Boromir. ‘If the Emyn Muil lie beforeus, then we can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike west-ward and southward, until we come to the Entwash and crossinto my own land.’
‘We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn,
‘but that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be moreperilous than it sounds. The vale of Entwash is ﬂat and fenny,and fog is a deadly peril there for those on foot and laden. Iwould not abandon our boats until we must. The River is atleast a path that cannot be missed.’
508 the fellowship of the ring
‘But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,’ objected Boromir.
‘And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come
unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then? Leapdown the Falls and land in the marshes?’
‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our
boats by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take tothe water again. Do you not know, Boromir, or do you choose
to forget the North Stair, and the high seat upon Amon Hen,that were made in the days of the great kings? I at least havea mind to stand in that high place again, before I decide myfurther course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign thatwill guide us.’
Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it
became plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he
went, he gave in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of MinasTirith to desert their friends at need,’ he said, ‘and you willneed my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. Tothe tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to myhome, alone if my help has not earned the reward of anycompanionship.’
The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little.
It was decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once goforward along the shore, while the others remained by theboats. Aragorn hoped to ﬁnd some way by which they couldcarry both their boats and their baggage to the smoother
water beyond the Rapids.
‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but
that does not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir
alive. None have ever done so yet. No road was made by theMen of Gondor in this region, for even in their great daystheir realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil;but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore,if I can ﬁnd it. It cannot yet have perished; for light boatsused to journey out of Wilderland down to Osgiliath, and stilldid so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of Mordor beganto multiply.’
the great river 509
‘Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and
the Orcs prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. ‘If you go for-
ward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you ﬁnd a path.’
‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered
Aragorn. ‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in thattime, you will know that evil has indeed befallen us. Thenyou must take a new leader and follow him as best you can.’
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and
Legolas climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but
his fears proved groundless. Only two or three hours hadpassed, and it was barely mid-day, when the shadowy shapesof the explorers appeared again.
‘All is well,’ said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank.
‘There is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still
serviceable. The distance is not great: the head of the Rapidsis but half a mile below us, and they are little more than amile long. Not far beyond them the stream becomes clearand smooth again, though it runs swiftly. Our hardest taskwill be to get our boats and baggage to the old portage-way.We have found it, but it lies well back from the water-sidehere, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, a furlong or morefrom the shore. We did not ﬁnd where the northward landinglies. If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night.We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. Ifear we must leave the River now, and make for the portage-way as best we can from here.’
‘That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said
Boromir.
‘Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn.‘Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. ‘The legs of Men will lag on a
rough road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice hisown weight, Master Boromir!’
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done.
The goods were taken out of the boats and brought to thetop of the bank, where there was a level space. Then theboats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They were
510 the fellowship of the ring
far less heavy than any had expected. Of what tree growing
in the Elvish country they were made not even Legolas knew;
but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry andPippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the ﬂat.Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift andhaul them over the ground that the Company now had tocross. It sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of
grey limestone-boulders, with many hidden holes shroudedwith weeds and bushes; there were thickets of brambles, andsheer dells; and here and there boggy pools fed by waterstrickling from the terraces further inland.
One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while
the others toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage.At last all was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then
with little further hindrance, save from sprawling briars andmany fallen stones, they moved forward all together. Fog stillhung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to theirleft mist shrouded the River: they could hear it rushing andfoaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir,but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey, beforeall was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran
gently down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed tohave been scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by thewater swirling down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier ofrock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond it theshore rose sheer into a grey cliff, and there was no furtherpassage for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy
dusk was closing in. They sat beside the water listening tothe confused rush and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist;they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were as gloomyas the dying day.
‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’
said Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had amind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all tootired – except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’
the great river 511
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn.
‘Tomorrow we must journey by day again. Unless the
weather changes once more and cheats us, we shall have agood chance of slipping through, unseen by any eyes on theeastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns:three hours off and one on guard.’
Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of
rain an hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they
started. Already the fog was thinning. They kept as close asthey could to the western side, and they could see the dimshapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls withtheir feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the clouds
drew down lower, and it began to rain heavily. They drewthe skin-covers over their boats to prevent them from beingﬂooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them orabout them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above
grew lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and theirdraggled fringes trailed away northward up the River. Thefogs and mists were gone. Before the travellers lay a wideravine, with great rocky sides to which clung, upon shelvesand in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The channel grewnarrower and the River swifter. Now they were speedingalong with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever theymight meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky,around them the dark overshadowed River, and before themblack, shutting out the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in whichno opening could be seen.
Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks
approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone theyseemed. Tall and sheer and ominous they stood upon eitherside of the stream. A narrow gap appeared between them,and the River swept the boats towards it.
‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried
Aragorn. ‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line,
512 the fellowship of the ring
and as far apart as you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’
As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose
like towers to meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey
ﬁgures silent but threatening. Then he saw that they wereindeed shaped and fashioned: the craft and power of old hadwrought upon them, and still they preserved through the sunsand rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which
they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded in thedeep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with blurredeyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. Theleft hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture ofwarning; in each right hand there was an axe; upon each headthere was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power andmajesty they still wore, the silent wardens of a long-vanished
kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon Frodo, and he cowereddown, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as the boatdrew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the boats whirledby, frail and ﬂeeting as little leaves, under the enduringshadow of the sentinels of Nu ´menor. So they passed into the
dark chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either
side. Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared andechoed, and a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouchingover his knees heard Sam in front muttering and groaning:‘What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out ofthis boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in a puddle again, letalone a river!’
‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned
and saw Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherwornRanger was no longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son ofArathorn, proud and erect, guiding the boat with skilfulstrokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was blowingin the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning fromexile to his own land.
‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the
likenesses of Isildur and Ana ´rion, my sires of old. Under their
shadow Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House
the great river 513
of Valandil Isildur’s son, heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself:
‘Would that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for
Minas Anor and the walls of my own city! But whither nowshall I go?’
The chasm was long and dark, and ﬁlled with the noise of
wind and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat
towards the west so that at ﬁrst all was dark ahead; but soonFrodo saw a tall gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftlyit drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out intoa wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in
a windy sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval
lake, pale Nen Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sideswere clad with trees, but their heads were bare, cold-gleamingin the sunlight. At the far southern end rose three peaks.The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others andsundered from them, an island in the waters, about whichthe ﬂowing River ﬂung pale shimmering arms. Distant butdeep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the rollof thunder heard far away.
‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the
tall peak. ‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon theright is Amon Hen, the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. Inthe days of the great kings there were high seats upon them,and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of manor beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shadeof night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless voiceof Rauros calling.’
The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on
the current that ﬂowed through the middle of the lake. Theyate some food, and then they took to their paddles andhastened on their way. The sides of the westward hills fellinto shadow, and the Sun grew round and red. Here andthere a misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed beforethem, darkling in the twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great
514 the fellowship of the ring
voice. Already night was laid on the ﬂowing waters when the
travellers came at last under the shadow of the hills.
The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was
behind them. They could go no further without choice
between the east-way and the west. The last stage of theQuest was before them.
Chapter 10
THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon
its western side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a greenlawn ran down to the water from the feet of Amon Hen.
Behind it rose the ﬁrst gentle slopes of the hill clad with trees,
and trees marched away westward along the curving shoresof the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed thegrass.
‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the lawn
of Parth Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let
us hope that no evil has yet come here.’
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside
them they made their camp. They set a watch, but had nosight nor sound of their enemies. If Gollum had contrived tofollow them, he remained unseen and unheard. Nonetheless
as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often inhis sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and cameto Frodo, whose turn it was to watch.
‘Why are you waking?’ asked Frodo. ‘It is not your watch.’‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a
threat has been growing in my sleep. It would be well to drawyour sword.’
‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn.Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dis-
may the edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said.‘Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.’
‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. ‘But maybe they are not
on this side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it
may point to no more than spies of Mordor roaming on the
slopes of Amon Lhaw. I have never heard before of Orcs
516 the fellowship of the ring
upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows what may happen in these
evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the
passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’
The day came like ﬁre and smoke. Low in the East there
were black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning.The rising sun lit them from beneath with ﬂames of murky
red; but soon it climbed above them into a clear sky. Thesummit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo lookedout eastward and gazed at the tall island. Its sides sprangsheer out of the running water. High up above the tall cliffswere steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting onehead above another; and above them again were grey faces
of inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Manybirds were circling about it, but no sign of other living thingscould be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company
together. ‘The day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day ofchoice which we have long delayed. What shall now becomeof our Company that has travelled so far in fellowship? Shallwe turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; orturn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break ourfellowship and go this way and that as each may choose?Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halthere. The enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fearthat the Orcs may already be on this side of the water.’
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden
is laid upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Coun-cil. Your own way you alone can choose. In this matter Icannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and though I have triedto bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he hadfor this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems thatif he were here now the choice would still wait on you. Suchis your fate.’
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I
know that haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden
the breaking of the fellowship 517
is heavy. Give me an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me
be alone!’
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo
son of Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you
shall be alone. We will stay here for a while. But do not strayfar or out of call.’
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who
had been watching his master with great concern, shook his
head and muttered: ‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no goodSam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.’
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw
that while the others restrained themselves and did not stareat him, the eyes of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until hepassed out of sight in the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering aimlessly at ﬁrst in the wood, Frodo found that
his feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill.
He came to a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago.In steep places stairs of stone had been hewn, but now theywere cracked and worn, and split by the roots of trees. Forsome while he climbed, not caring which way he went, untilhe came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and inthe midst was a wide ﬂat stone. The little upland lawn wasopen upon the East and was ﬁlled now with the early sunlight.Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air
between him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros
was a mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his
hands, staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. Allthat had happened since Bilbo left the Shire was passingthrough his mind, and he recalled and pondered everythingthat he could remember of Gandalf’s words. Time went on,and still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling
came to him that something was behind him, that unfriendlyeyes were upon him. He sprang up and turned; but all that
518 the fellowship of the ring
he saw to his surprise was Boromir, and his face was smiling
and kind.
‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If
Aragorn is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should
wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you.And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now and talk for awhile, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end.But two together may perhaps ﬁnd wisdom.’
‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that
any speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but Iam afraid of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The
wind murmured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure
that you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you.
You need counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’
‘I think I know already what counsel you would give,
Boromir,’ said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom butfor the warning of my heart.’
‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply.‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against
refusal of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if itmust be said, against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’
‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your
little country, though you knew it not.’
‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is
changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but theyare not strong enough. If they fail, what then?’
‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that
they will not fail.’
‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo.‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. ‘The Ring!
Is it not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear anddoubt for so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seenit only for an instant in the house of Elrond. Could I not havea sight of it again?’
the breaking of the fellowship 519
Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught
the strange gleam in Boromir’s eyes, yet his face was still kind
and friendly. ‘It is best that it should lie hidden,’ he answered.
‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not
even speak of it? For you seem ever to think only of its powerin the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good.The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the
Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with theEnemy. But why, if it were with us?’
‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. ‘Because
we cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go
on,’ he cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond – all these folk have taughtyou to say so. For themselves they may be right. These elves
and half-elves and wizards, they would come to grief perhaps.Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. Buteach to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not becorrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been staunch throughlong years of trial. We do not desire the power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a justcause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light theRing of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor.It is mad not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy againsthim. The fearless, the ruthless, these alone will achieve vic-tory. What could not a warrior do in this hour, a great leader?What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why notBoromir? The Ring would give me power of Command.How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men wouldﬂock to my banner!’
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly.
Almost he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talkdwelt on walls and weapons, and the mustering of men; andhe drew plans for great alliances and glorious victories to be;and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mightyking, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and wavedhis arms.
‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say
520 the fellowship of the ring
destroy it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope
of doing so. It does not. The only plan that is proposed to
us is that a halﬂing should walk blindly into Mordor andoffer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for himself.Folly!
‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now sud-
denly to Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so,
the boldest should pardon you. But is it not really your goodsense that revolts?’
‘No, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘Simply afraid. But I am glad
to have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’
‘Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His
eyes were shining and his face eager.
‘You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo.
‘But you will come, at least for a while?’ Boromir persisted.
‘My city is not far now; and it is little further from there toMordor than from here. We have been long in the wilderness,and you need news of what the Enemy is doing before youmake a move. Come with me, Frodo,’ he said. ‘You need restbefore your venture, if go you must.’ He laid his hand on thehobbit’s shoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the handtrembling with suppressed excitement. He stepped quicklyaway, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice hisheight and many times his match in strength.
‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true
man, neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that youknow now; but I give you my word that I do not desire tokeep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan?Lend me the Ring!’
‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. ‘The Council laid it upon me to
bear it.’
‘It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried
Boromir. ‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Runningwilfully to death and ruining our cause. If any mortals haveclaim to the Ring, it is the men of Nu ´menor, and not
Halﬂings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It mighthave been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!’
the breaking of the fellowship 521
Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great ﬂat
stone stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said
Boromir in a softer voice. ‘Why not get rid of it? Why not befree of your doubt and fear? You can lay the blame on me,if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it byforce. For I am too strong for you, halﬂing,’ he cried; andsuddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His
fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging ﬁrewas in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them.
There was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulledout the Ring upon its chain and quickly slipped it on hisﬁnger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The Mangasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly
about, seeking here and there among the rocks and trees.
‘Miserable trickster!’ he shouted. ‘Let me get my hands on
you! Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauronand sell us all. You have only waited your chance to leave usin the lurch. Curse you and all halﬂings to death and dark-ness!’ Then, catching his foot on a stone, he fell sprawlingand lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his owncurse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept.
He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away
the tears. ‘What have I said?’ he cried. ‘What have I done?Frodo, Frodo!’ he called. ‘Come back! A madness took me,but it has passed. Come back!’
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries.
He was already far away, leaping blindly up the path to thehill-top. Terror and grief shook him, seeing in his thoughtthe mad ﬁerce face of Boromir, and his burning eyes.
Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and
halted, gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wideﬂat circle, paved with mighty ﬂags, and surrounded with acrumbling battlement; and in the middle, set upon fourcarven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of manysteps. Up he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like
522 the fellowship of the ring
a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of mountain-
kings.
At ﬁrst he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of
mist in which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon
him. Then here and there the mist gave way and he sawmany visions: small and clear as if they were under his eyesupon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only
bright living images. The world seemed to have shrunk andfallen silent. He was sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on AmonHen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Nu ´menor. Eastward
he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, andforests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the GreatRiver lay like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountainsstood small and hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked
and saw the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, thepinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward helooked, and below his very feet the Great River curled like atoppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into afoaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume.And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, andmyriads of sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun,and beneath them a green and silver sea, rippling in endlesslines.
But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The
Misty Mountains were crawling like anthills: orcs were issuingout of a thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwoodthere was deadly strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts. Theland of the Beornings was aﬂame; a cloud was over Moria;smoke rose on the borders of Lo ´rien.
Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves
poured from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships ofwar put out to sea; and out of the East Men were movingendlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon horses,chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of theDark Lord was in motion. Then turning south again he beheldMinas Tirith. Far away it seemed, and beautiful: white-walled,many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-seat; its
the breaking of the fellowship 523
battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright with
many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas
Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong.Thither, eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passedthe ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of MinasMorgul, and the haunted Mountains, and it looked uponGorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land of Mordor. Dark-
ness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke.Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising. Thenat last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement uponbattlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron,gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-du ˆr, Fortress
of Sauron. All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the
Dark Tower that did not sleep. He knew that it had become
aware of his gaze. A ﬁerce eager will was there. It leapedtowards him; almost like a ﬁnger he felt it, searching for him.Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly wherehe was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon Tol Brandir– he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering hishead with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily
I come, I come to you ? He could not tell. Then as a ﬂash from
some other point of power there came to his mind anotherthought: Take it off! Take it off! Fool, take it off! Take off the
Ring!
The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly
balanced between their piercing points, he writhed, tor-mented. Suddenly he was aware of himself again, Frodo,neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and with oneremaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off hisﬁnger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat.A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; itmissed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded. Then allthe sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but
his will was ﬁrm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to
524 the fellowship of the ring
himself. ‘I will do now what I must,’ he said. ‘This at least is
plain: the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the
Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does moreharm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I cantrust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry andPippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, andhe will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I
will go alone. At once.’
He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn
where Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. Hethought he could hear cries and calls from the woods nearthe shore below.
‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I
have been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What
can I do?’ he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. Ishan’t get a chance again. I hate leaving them, and like thiswithout any explanation. But surely they will understand.Sam will. And what else can I do?’
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He
vanished and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of thewind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time
they had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now theywere sitting in a circle, and they were talking. Every now andagain they made efforts to speak of other things, of their
long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, andthe remnants of its great works that could still be seen in thisstrange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone kings andthe seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside thefalls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayedback to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose todo? Why was he hesitating?
‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’
said Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless thanever for the Company to go east, since we have been tracked
the breaking of the fellowship 525
by Gollum, and must fear that the secret of our journey is
already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer to the Fire
and the destruction of the Burden.
‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand;
but the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to dowhat even Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keepthe Burden secret, or to hold off the full might of the Enemy
when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choosein Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we missGandalf most.’
‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs
make up our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide,and so help Frodo? Let us call him back and then vote! Ishould vote for Minas Tirith.’
‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only
sent to help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than
we wished; and none of us is under any oath or command toseek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting from Lothlo ´rien.
Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reachedthe last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. Iwould choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I followhim.’
‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be
faithless now to say farewell.’
‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said
Aragorn. ‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him;nor do I think that all should. That venture is desperate: asmuch so for eight as for three or two, or one alone. If youwould let me choose, then I should appoint three com-panions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli;and myself. Boromir will return to his own city, where hisfather and his people need him; and with him the othersshould go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas isnot willing to leave us.’
‘That won’t do at all!’ cried Merry. ‘We can’t leave Frodo!
Pippin and I always intended to go wherever he went, andwe still do. But we did not realize what that would mean. It
526 the fellowship of the ring
seemed different so far away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It
would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why
can’t we stop him?’
‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is
worrying about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to hisgoing east. And he doesn’t like to ask anyone to go with him,poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to Mordor alone!’
Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought toknow that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to know that if wecan’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t think you under-
stand my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which wayto go. Of course not! What’s the good of Minas Tirithanyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, Master
Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was then that they dis-covered that Boromir, who at ﬁrst had been sitting silent onthe outside of the circle, was no longer there.
‘Now where’s he got to?’ cried Sam, looking worried. ‘He’s
been a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not inthis business. He’s off to his home, as he always said; and noblame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to ﬁnd theCracks of Doom, if he can. But he’s afraid . Now it’s come to
the point, he’s just plain terriﬁed. That’s what his trouble is.Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so to speak – we allhave – since we left home, or he’d be so terriﬁed he’d just ﬂingthe Ring in the River and bolt. But he’s still too frightened tostart. And he isn’t worrying about us either: whether we’ll goalong with him or no. He knows we mean to. That’s anotherthing that’s bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he’llwant to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to havetrouble when he comes back. For he’ll screw himself up allright, as sure as his name’s Baggins.’
‘I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’
‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin.‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate
of the Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to
the breaking of the fellowship 527
drive him one way or the other. Nor do I think that we should
succeed, if we tried. There are other powers at work far
stronger.’
‘Well, I wish Frodo would ‘‘screw himself up’’ and come
back, and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. ‘This waiting ishorrible! Surely the time is up?’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn. ‘The hour is long passed. The morning
is wearing away. We must call for him.’
At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from
the trees and walked towards them without speaking. His face
looked grim and sad. He paused as if counting those thatwere present, and then sat down aloof, with his eyes on theground.
‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have
you seen Frodo?’
Boromir hesitated for a second. ‘Yes, and no,’ he answered
slowly. ‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke
to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to goeast. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. I have neverseen such a thing happen before, though I have heard of itin tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not ﬁnd himagain. I thought he would return to you.’
‘Is that all that you have to say?’ said Aragorn, looking hard
and not too kindly at Boromir.
‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’‘This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what
this Man has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put thething on? He didn’t ought to have; and if he has, goodnessknows what may have happened!’
‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he
had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’
‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s
been away ages now.’
‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked
Aragorn.
‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an
528 the fellowship of the ring
hour. I have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I
do not know!’ He put his head in his hands, and sat as if
bowed with grief.
‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try
and ﬁnd him at once. Come on!’
‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into
pairs, and arrange – here, hold on! Wait!’
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had
dashed off ﬁrst. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were
already disappearing westward into the trees by the shore,shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their clear, high, hobbit-voices.
Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madnessseemed to have fallen on the Company.
‘We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. ‘Boro-
mir! I do not know what part you have played in this mischief,
but help now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guardthem at the least, even if you cannot ﬁnd Frodo. Come backto this spot, if you ﬁnd him, or any traces of him. I shallreturn soon.’
Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam.
Just as he reached the little lawn among the rowans he over-took him, toiling uphill, panting and calling, Frodo!
‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be
alone. There is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to thetop, to the Seat of Amon Hen, to see what may be seen. And
look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went this way. Follow
me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider
the Ranger, and soon fell behind. He had not gone far beforeAragorn was out of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed.Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head.
‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too
short, so use your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn’t lying,that’s not his way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Some-thing scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed himself up to thepoint, sudden. He made up his mind at last – to go. Where
the breaking of the fellowship 529
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam.
That’s hard, cruel hard.’
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the
tears. ‘Steady, Gamgee!’ he said. ‘Think, if you can! He can’t
ﬂy across rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got nogear. So he’s got to get back to the boats. Back to the boats!Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!’
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and
cut his knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of
the lawn of Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats weredrawn up out of the water. No one was there. There seemedto be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them.He stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boatwas sliding down the bank all by itself. With a shout Sam
raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the water.
‘Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming!’ called Sam, and ﬂung him-
self from the bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missedit by a yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downwardinto deep swift water. Gurgling he went under, and the Riverclosed over his curly head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A
paddle swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just intime to grasp Sam by the hair as he came up, bubbling andstruggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.
‘Up you come, Sam my lad!’ said Frodo. ‘Now take my
hand!’
‘Save me, Mr. Frodo!’ gasped Sam. ‘I’m drownded. I can’t
see your hand.’
‘Here it is. Don’t pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread
water and don’t ﬂounder, or you’ll upset the boat. Therenow, get hold of the side, and let me use the paddle!’
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the
bank, and Sam was able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat.Frodo took off the Ring and stepped ashore again.
‘Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!’
he said.
‘Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard!’ said Sam shivering. ‘That’s
530 the fellowship of the ring
hard, trying to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed
right, where would you be now?’
‘Safely on my way.’
‘Safely!’ said Sam. ‘All alone and without me to help you?
I couldn’t have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’
‘It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said
Frodo, ‘and I could not have borne that.’
‘Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam.
‘But I am going to Mordor.’‘I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are.
And I’m coming with you.’
‘Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘don’t hinder me! The others will
be coming back at any minute. If they catch me here, I shallhave to argue and explain, and I shall never have the heart
or the chance to get off. But I must go at once. It’s the onlyway.’
‘Of course it is,’ answered Sam. ‘But not alone. I’m coming
too, or neither of us isn’t going. I’ll knock holes in all theboats ﬁrst.’
Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness
touched his heart. ‘Leave one!’ he said. ‘We’ll need it. But youcan’t come like this without your gear or food or anything.’
‘Just hold on a moment, and I’ll get my stuff!’ cried Sam
eagerly. ‘It’s all ready. I thought we should be off today.’ Herushed to the camping place, ﬁshed out his pack from thepile where Frodo had laid it when he emptied the boat of hiscompanions’ goods, grabbed a spare blanket, and some extrapackages of food, and ran back.
‘So all my plan is spoilt!’ said Frodo. ‘It is no good trying
to escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad.Come along! It is plain that we were meant to go together.We will go, and may the others ﬁnd a safe road! Strider willlook after them. I don’t suppose we shall see them again.’
‘Yet we may, Mr. Frodo. We may,’ said Sam.
So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest
together. Frodo paddled away from the shore, and the River
the breaking of the fellowship 531
bore them swiftly away, down the western arm, and past the
frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the great falls
drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it washard work to pass across the current at the southward end ofthe island and drive the boat eastward towards the far shore.
At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes
of Amon Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they
drew the boat out, high above the water, and hid it as well asthey could behind a great boulder. Then shouldering theirburdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring themover the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Landof Shadow.
.
MAPS
3 42 1
1
2
3
4
ii
works by j. r.r.tolkien
The Hobbit
Leaf by Niggle
On Fairy-Stories
Farmer Giles of Ham
The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth
The Lord of the Rings
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil
The Road Goes Ever On (with Donald Swann)
Smith of Wootton Major
works published posthumously
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo
The Father Christmas Letters
The Silmarillion
Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien
Unﬁnished Tales
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien
Finn and Hengest
Mr Bliss
The Monsters and the Critics & Other Essays
Roverandom
The Children of Hu ´rin
The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún
thehistoryofmiddle- earth –bychristophertolkien
I The Book of Lost Tales, Part One
II The Book of Lost Tales, Part Two
III The Lays of Beleriand
IV The Shaping of Middle-earth
V The Lost Road and Other Writings
VI The Return of the Shadow
VII The Treason of Isengard
VIII The War of the Ring
IX Sauron Defeated
X Morgoth’s Ring
XI The War of the Jewels
XII The Peoples of Middle-earth

HarperCollinsPublishersCopyright
77–85Fulham Palace Road,
Hammersmith, London W68 JB
www.tolkien.co.uk
www.tolkienestate.com
Published by HarperCollinsPublishers 2008
1
This edition is based on the reset edition ﬁrst published 2004
First published in Great Britain by George Allen & Unwin 1954
Second Edition 1966
Copyright © The Trustees of the J.R.R.Tolkien 1967 Settlement 1954,1966
®
and ‘Tolkien’®are registered trademarks of
The J.R.R. Tolkien Estate Limited
AER Edition © March 2009 ISBN: 978-0-061-91767-7
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright  
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-
exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-
screen.  No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,  
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information  
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or  
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written  
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada 
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand  
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1 
Auckland, New Zealand 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States  
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 
10 East 53rd Street 
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com